This is Jockelpont Cas number 325.
With echo trails and me, Jockel Willing.
Good evening, echo.
Good evening.
And also, joining us again tonight is Jason Gardner.
Good evening, Jason.
Good evening.
Chicago Times Special Camp Robinson, Nebraska May 24th, 1877.
Your correspondent has obtained some very valuable information in regard to the Custer massacre
from crazy horse, through horned horse as his spokesman, which is authentic and confirmed
by other principal chiefs.
I interviewed the chiefs this afternoon.
Lieutenant Clark arranging for the meeting in William Hunter acting as interpreter
a man perfectly reliable and thoroughly converse in the Indian language.
This is the Indian version and the first published.
The attack was made on the village by a strong force at 11 o'clock in the morning at the
upper end of the village.
This was the force commanded by Major Reno and very shortly afterward the lower end of the
village was attacked by another strong force that commanded by Custer.
The village was divided into seven different bands of Indians each commanded by a separate
chief and extended in nearly a straight line.
The village consisted of 18 hundred lodges and at least 400 wicky ups, a lodge made of
small poles and willows for temporary shelter.
Each of the wicky ups contained four young bucks and the estimate made by crazy horses
that each lodge had from three to four warriors.
Estimating at three made a fighting force of seven thousand Indians.
This is the lowest estimate that can be made for there were a good many Indians without
shelter hangers on who fought when called upon and the usual number was much above seven
thousand.
The attack was a surprise and totally unlipped for when Custer made the charge the women
proposes children and in fact all that were not fighters made a stampede in an orderly
direction.
Custer seemed so numerous about a mistook them for the main body of Indians retreating
and abandoning their villages and immediately gave pursuit.
The warriors in the village seeing this divided their forces into two parts.
One intercepting Custer between their non-combatants and him and the other getting his in his
rear.
Outnumbering him as they did they had him at their mercy and the dreadful massacre ensued.
Horned horse says the smoke and dust were so great that folk could not be distinguished
from friend.
The horses were wild with fright and uncontrollable.
The Indians were knocking each other from their steeds and it is an absolute fact
that several young bucks in their excitement and fury killed each other, several dead Indians
being found killed by arrows.
Horned horse represented this hell of fire and smoke and death by intertwining his fingers
and saying just like this Indians and white men.
These chiefs say they suffered a loss of 58 killed and over 60 wounded.
And their way of expressing it I should judge that about 60% of their wounded died.
While this butcher he was going on, Reno was fighting in the upper part of the village but
did not get in so far as to get surrounded and manage to escape.
They say had he got in his far, he would have suffered the same fate as Custer but he
retreated to the Bluffs and was held there until Indians fighting Custer.
Rising over half the village could join the northern portion in besieging him.
These Indians claim that but for the time the arrival of General Terry they would have
certainly got Reno.
They would have surrounded and stormed him out or would have besieged and eventually captured
him.
From what I know of crazy horse I should say that he no doubt is capable of conducting a siege.
In both the Rose Bud fight and the Custer massacre the Indians claim that crazy horse
rode unarmed in the thickest of the fight invoking the blessing of the great spirit on
himself that if he was right he might be victorious and if wrong that he might be killed.
So that right there is an excerpt from a book called I fought with Custer which we covered
on this podcast podcast number 48.
You might want to go check that one out and that's from a section that we actually didn't
cover on the podcast.
The section of the book that's called They fought against Custer and it's got a bunch
of firsthand accounts from the Indians that fought against Custer.
And I didn't cover that section because we had already covered the Native American perspective
in podcast 45 where we discussed the book called Wooden Leg who was a northern Cheyenne
Indian who fought against Custer at Little Big Horn.
And that's a good podcast to listen to.
I've got quite a few seal friends that that's one of their favorite podcasts.
But this man that gets mentioned here this warrior he's mentioned in both those books.
And he's mentioned pretty quickly in both the books but he's someone that is definitely
worth exploring as a warrior as a man and as a leader and Jason you sent me a great
book while back called the Journey of Crazy Horse.
This book is written by a guy named Joseph M. Marshall the third who himself is a member
of the Lakota tribe.
He was raised on the Rosebud Indian reservation in South Dakota and he kind of reports
on or explores his journey of discovering and understanding crazy horse and starts off
with a certain image of crazy horse and then learns more about him over time.
Kind of going from a legend held aloft sort of above being human to being a warrior to being
a leader and then ultimately understanding him as a man.
And much of what he's you know I always like to do the first person accounting that's
what I'm always trying to get for the podcast and this much of what Joseph talks about.
Joseph Marshall talks about is stuff that was passed to him through his elders through
oral history and that's I think what allows this book to come to life so well so guess
we dive into the journey of the journey of crazy horse by Joseph M. Marshall the third.
Where did you find this book originally?
So I got a buddy that lives in Iowa, Chris Anderson and he sent me this book to read
it was like how you need to check this out.
So about two years ago I knocked it out on audible and then as we started to do the you
know we're doing the battlefield a little big one you know I'm like well I want to understand
more about the for everything that cost her did wrong there's stuff that's sitting
born crazy horse we're doing right now I want to try to understand more that so I hit
this book up and then it made sense for something that we could talk about here especially
because it's from the Lakota perspective and brought down from their oral history.
Yeah the we're so the battlefield that you're talking about this is an event that we do
at echelon front where we go and look at the we go and walk the battlefield and there's
all these leaders to learn from.
I mean we do get his bird and this would be the first one that the first series that we're
going to do up at a little big horn.
So going out there understanding the personalities of these individuals gives you so much
more depth into understanding their leadership decisions and the decisions that they made
you can start to identify how their personalities impacted their decisions and then you
can look at yourself and say what part of my personality is impacting my decision and we
I haven't been to live you've been a little big horn yet yeah I have same kind of spiritual
impact as get his bird yes and it's incredible because you you can sit you can sit in the
gully where Reno had hit they well they came across a came across river and attacked the south
end of the camp because initially they could only see a portion of it and thought it was
much smaller and then they'd the morons didn't listen to their crow scouts who said whoa that's
a much bigger in cabin than you think it is and you you can see all these spots and and it's
just it's it's it's it's it's it's really humbling to be able to see it and talk about it
and discuss what's going on and and feel the energy it was there yeah I'm looking forward to
what when we doing that August it's August yeah all right so let's get into this book
here we go crazy horses been my hero since I was a boy he was arguably the best known
Lakota leader in the latter half of the 19th century a turbulent time on the northern plains
at first I knew crazy horse only as a fighting man the warrior
I didn't know or care what he felt what he thought I cared only that he was a Lakota
and that he was brave and performed deeds that fired my imagination
but it's time went on there were more stories I now know crazy horse as a man
first and a legend second a very distant second in fact he is much like my father and my uncles
and my all my grandfather's he walks straight he's polite and he speaks softly
but there's also an aura of mystery about him as though sometimes I am seeing him in a
mist that blends legend and reality it's that aura that seems to appeal to most people
and I'm convinced that many want to connect with the mystery more than they want to identify
with the man I can remember consciously hearing his name for the first time the summer I was six
years old my grandfather Albert and a man I knew as grandpa Isaac and I had just crossed the
little white river and stopped arrest as they both fashion their role your own cigarettes one of
them compared the slow the slow moving little white to the greasy grass river I learned later
that the greasy grass was in south central Montana and was also known as a little big horn
in the shade of a thick grove of sand bar willow the two old men spoke about a battle
and names that I had never heard before or at least that I couldn't remember hearing before
rolled off their tongues that day along the river one name was repeated more often than the
others in the story of that battle the name his crazy horse he was a leader of fighting men
and his mere appearance on the battlefield was apparently enough to inspire others to fight
crazy horse had led a charge of warriors against the soldiers in the second engagement of that
battle a leader commented on that particular action when recounting the battle years later by saying
I have never seen anything so brave by the age of six I'd already listened to many stories from
these two grandfather's I was well aware that being a fighting man was one way of being a man
in the Lakota ways of old I knew that men were often injured or wounded in battle and sometimes
killed and I knew that in a battle a man could prove himself for one man to obviously evoke
such reverence and respect from two grandfather's who told the story of 1876 greasy grass fight
the battle of little big horn was of some consequence in my six year old world I could think of only
two or three other old men in the same category as these two grandfather's so when they respected
someone it was no small thing that day by the little white river crazy horse became a part of my life
we were having this conversation I think yesterday this idea and I think I had brought it up
on some other podcast but the idea that this if you're going to go out and fight
is that programmed into us is that just what we're raised with that we think hey going out and fighting
and being heroic being a warrior is a cool thing is a good thing or is there some sort of
genetic component to it because as a human being in a group of other human beings that are trying to
survive 10,000 years ago and we're part of a gang we're part of a tribe and if Jason is the kind
of guy that goes out and kills a buffalo or defends our tribe then you help us all survive and so
we're naturally we naturally intuitively instinctively elevate the people that are ready to fight
and we can't even control it I don't know what do you think yeah it's it's interesting because
the good hunters also translate to their good warriors right but then in their society in
the Lakota Society the medicine men were also revered as well so I guess people were elevated
based on whatever they brought to the community with large and then oftentimes with either the
medicine men or the warriors eventually you age out of it and then they're looking at you for
for your wisdom you know like Chamberlain that guy comes over from like the intellectual
side of the house because he's a college professor when he joins the army so it's kind of like
he wasn't really that that's what makes him so interesting and so cool is he's like good at everything
every side of the Rubik's Cube you examine with that guy he's square the solid colors yeah
the thing is though you have all these different societies around the world that are some of them are totally
disconnected from other societies and there's like always a warrior tradition yes it leads me to believe that
at least at some level human beings look at the person that's ready to stand up and fight and defend
and they have an instinctual inherent elevation elevated attitude towards that person here this
guy is six years old you know I'm thinking and he's hearing these stories and thinks it's cool
in the parlance of our time right like hey that's wow this sounds cool what was I doing when I was
eight years old watching apocalypse now thinking that's cool that guy he special forces he's going on
this mission up the river that's cool I don't know I mean my dad wasn't in the military there was
no my grandfather was but he wasn't super influential in my life and all of the sudden as just instinct
that looks cool it yeah because it doesn't appear to be generation leaving in this case crazy
horses dad is a matter of fact he's not a fighter yeah um and so you know you look at how we
revere sports figures and in a lot of ways their warriors you choose a sporting team and they're
the ones that are going out and doing battle with other sporting teams or rooting for them and
they're who are putting up on a pedestal for the most spot it it's not that different than
then combat which who's going on it's an interesting thing to discuss feels like there's an
element of risk there too like so skill and then risk and sacrifice that for everybody sacrifice for
everybody else and they're they're lies in why we hold up like that courage as being a value that we
or something that we value right is courage yeah like if you if you're a little
say like I'm a six year old or whatever and you think of some guy who goes out and kills a buffalo
and then brings it back or whatever you think man if I want to try to kill a buffalo and
things in a kill me you know so he's like good at what he does he's risk dying and then when he
brings it back it's for all of us he's like hero you know right so kind of it's I mean that's obviously
like a metaphor or the the sporting teams and stuff that's a metaphor yeah that's a big
but of the same thing though yeah exactly but I and I think this is so obvious what we're saying
I ask my actual question is is it instinctual is it like part of our nature
that we can you know it may or may not get you know expanded upon as we grow up in some people
you know being a warrior stupid why would you go and sacrifice yourself for other people like
that's unattitude so you can overcome this instinct but it is kind of crazy to think hey this is
the way many different societies from all different background all kind of elevate this warrior
is it an in isn't a natural animal instinct to think this person's going to protect the tribe
this person's going to help the tribe this person's going to feed the tribe this person's possibly
going to sacrifice for themselves for the tribe and that's a positive thing we're going to
elevate them because they're putting the tribe before themselves they're putting themselves at
risk in order to save the tribe and that's why it's very likely instinctual and
I don't I don't I don't I think that's no matter where you look if you examine closely
that's still revered today this individual human overcame the the instinct of self preservation
to look out for me and look out for my family we're going to elevate that individual
all right going back to the book here every Lakota baby was born with thick shiny black hair
that stayed black for most of adulthood but the hair of the son of crazy horse seemed to grow
lighter even as he lost his baby fat which happened to him quicker than the most children
to his mother and the other women in his life it was an endearing characteristic
although they worried that it would prove to be troublesome for him later in life
outside the reach of sharp ears he was referred to as the light-haired one
to his face he was simply called Gigi or light hair so he's got a distinctive characteristic
out of the gate which is also kind of interesting you know you got a my name is Joko which is
a weird name and I've had that it's a nickname but it's been my nickname since I was born
which meant when I met someone when I was five years old and seven years old and four years old
and ten years old they would say what's your name and I had to say this weird name you know my
name is Joko but that's I didn't really know that that was just a nickname it's all as a
older so you kind of have to contend with this right it's kind of like oh you got to contend with this
what happened in weird name you haven't weird name yes I know that did you know that yes
there I did did you did you you feel that a little bit like when you were six years old yes
you did now Jason was as hey I'm Jason good you have to spell it you know the mispronounce
you're just good to go no so I think these kind of distinctive characteristic can sometimes help
they can also sometimes I think hurt kids when you're young you got some weird like sometimes
have to kids grow really tall quickly yeah and they don't they don't like it you know they feel like
awkward or people are looking at them or when you get glasses right that's another thing maybe
it's not that big of a deal when I was a kid like when someone had glasses they had to contend with
that yeah to deal with it but they're tempering them it's making I mean that's the metaphor he uses
in here that it the teasing temper's crazy horse to make him hard and it's a boy named Sue yes
that's exactly what I was thinking about and his metaphor is like hanging the staff and the T.P. for
five years to slowly temper it and make it harder and then you're going to carve that ass dive into a bow
we were talking about buds earlier and amazed that they're still a huge attrition rate
and our thoughts are it it's because a lot of the some of the folks that are there and are such
good athletes that never failed anything whereas opposed when I got there and and I'd already
failed it a bunch of stuff and I was used to getting beat up at getting knockdown and it's like
I'm just gonna dust myself up and get moving again yeah you and I were saying that when they
when the instructors looked at us and said you suck we were like yeah I know obviously
but if you're like the star athlete and you get told you suck and you and then you lose the race
because by the way because you're so athletic they make you do a bunch of jump squats before you do
the sprint race and then you lose and then they call you loser and it's never happened before and
all of a sudden you're like I this isn't for me I can't win in this arena or I'm not good enough
and meanwhile you got Joe slightly below average athlete which is me just like well I'll keep going
I suck yeah I know but I'm gonna keep going I'm used to this yeah yeah
uh the other thing and he mentions in the book I'm not gonna highlight it but they called him
the women decided to call him light hair to just get it over with it was like hey you know oh
you got you look a little bit funky cool we're just gonna we're just gonna break make it
where's gonna call you that just get it out in the open get the elephant yeah in the room out
why not yeah isn't that what all the psychology does it's like oh you're afraid of elevator so
let's make you look at a bunch of pictures elevators and eventually maybe you get in one
and then late you just do graduated exposure and that's what they did here
the students to work yeah it's okay to be offended everybody thank you harder
there came a day when someone handed light hair a bow and a quiver of arrows to suited to his
size and strength it was the first tangible sign of life that lay ahead and his mother smiled
because she was proud or son would fall the path of a hunter and warrior hey the caveat obviously
not reading the whole book it's an awesome book if you if it sounds a little stilted when I'm reading
it like wait what's going on it's cuz I'm not reading the whole book get it and the audio book
you mentioned I think the audio book is read by the author so that makes it good too change came
into light hair's life and this is fast forward change came into light hair's life and yet another
way she who gave him life lost her own in the perception of the child at the time the perception
perception of time for a child can be often be irrelevant especially in a culture that was not
given to measuring it he was too young to understand that death is a part of life later he would
realize his mother's time on earth had been much too short so his mother dies when he's young
fast forward a little bit more seasons turned and I just just FYI you know be in a guy that's
in the language and stuff there's a whole section that this thing starts off talking about the
the language the Lakota language really cool the read I'm not gonna read it for two reasons
the primary reason being just me sitting here trying to pronounce these words would be a disaster
uh but they add a lot to the story when you read the story so another reason to get the book
one day light hair and his sister were given new mothers they were sisters quiet and polite as they
walked into the circle of their new life as the wives of crazy horse so the crazy horse that we're
talking about in this particular moment is the dad the dad that you mentioned Jason is a medicine man
so the dad is named crazy horse at this time and that's where they're talking about when they
refer to crazy horse not light hair the son who is the crazy horse that we all know about and their
mothers and daughters of his own son um going forward a little bit more the boy didn't completely
understand all about his father but he did know that crazy horse didn't hunt like the other man
or go to war a father who is a medicine man and didn't do the things men did cause the boy to feel
all the more different he wondered most of all why he looked different than the other boys so that's
another thing in his childhood everyone's talking about my dad's in the deems or my dad's going
to war and he's like well my dad's gonna go uh you know move smoke around and stuff so he feels awkward
about that hunting was the Lakota lifeblood like the wolf fox eagle mountain lion and hawk
the Lakota were hunters at age seven light hair realized more and more that hunting was the way to
have fresh meat and deer and elk hides for clothing and buffalo hide for lodge coverings he also
sense that he would be part of the process somehow like all boys light hair was becoming skilled
with his bow he had progressed to a stout a stout her bow stronger than the first he was given
one made in proportion to his size and strength his favorite game had changed as well shooting arrows
through a rolling willow hoop had become too easy in boring so his uncle little hawk and a few
other men introduced him to a new game shooting at grasshoppers the rules were simple walk along the
prairie with an arrow on the bow string and shoot it a grasshopper when it flew rolling hope a rolling
hoop was a much easier target a grasshopper was about the size of his little finger in flew
erratically and fast the men would suppress smiles when it first the boy was able to get off a shot
before he could pull back the string the insect was back in the grass but as he learned to hold
his bow ready he could send an arrow in the general direction of the flitting grasshopper shooting
a grasshoppers was not boring it was he learned of very humbling experience as the summer war on
his reaction became faster and more and more his arrows only narrowly missed grasshoppers and old
man told him have much to teach awesome just awesome stuff you're going out to see
Dudley aren't you and you're just thinking that I wonder if you're going to start
that walking around zapping grasshopper yeah you're going to get dialed in um freaking awesome what a
what a way to grow up and what a way to get good you're just that's what you do that's what you do
fast forward a little bit important character comes into play as the days passed he unknowingly
attracted the interest of a and curiosity of a man called high backbone the mini conjue with a
ogala wife a gala wife and he liked what he saw in the shy light hair and I might I don't think
I'd mention that yet so Marshall mentioned it that crazy horse is quiet and he doesn't talk a lot
but they they do give some examples in the book of when he's a kid they're playing games and he's not saying
anything you know he just he's a quiet he's a quiet the term he used here shy perhaps it was the
boys quiet determination or is innate humility high backbone himself was a quiet man not given
to pursuing the path of glory but he was deeply committed to achieving the status of wika the complete man
the complete man embodied the best qualities of the hunter and the fighting man
though all men necessarily filled the roles of both provider and protector the hunter warrior
not everyone could achieve the highest ideals for both calling high backbone was one of the few
high backbone was a leader of fighting men muscular and broad shoulder exuding the confidence of a man
who not only had physical strength but also a lifetime of experience and accomplishment so this guy
high backbone kind of becomes a mentor to to light hair and this idea this idea of being good
and multiple phases you know it's what who you say about the ruby cube chamberland chamberland yeah
because it's like you know yeah he's good on every side that you examine yeah and that's that's
what high backbone has that same quality they lay out these these virtues of the wika which I
thought was was really interesting on go and it's it's in the forward but it says the the virtues
are generosity courage fortitude and wisdom those and the very first thing they're saying for a
warrior in a man is is generosity which is pretty cool courage and fortitude and wisdom yeah
fast forward a little bit like most Lakota boys approaching the age of 12 light hair was a
proficient hunter like all hunters light hair learned to sit motionless and the drift would
blind along a creek for the better part of an afternoon waiting for a white tail to move within
effective killing range of his bow which is as far as he could throw a stone with all his might
it's pretty cool that's a pretty good uh i'm thinking he's probably able to go
60 yards what's your estimation oh no he's 12 years old he's 12 years old he's
don't rock what do you think he could throw rock I think he's probably at 15 or 20 yards really
yeah echo Charles assessment 35 40 though because think about it what's his draw what's his
draw on his strength yeah 12 it's it's probably not that hard pretty small yeah that's a good point
but dude we're talking about a kid that's just walking around freaking shooting grass
animals all day long so well and if you heard about like the the the the old British long bow
archers that had like a draw weight of 120 pounds or something and they weren't compound bows
they were just drawing back that much weight yeah so the Mongols had 80 pound bows that's insane that's
insane yeah um we interesting to hear what they're they're what they've someone on the other put in the
column yeah someone will tell us some will tell us what the what that range was so he's hunting um
here's another he's got another friend another friend named lone bear fast forward a little bit
lone bear and light hair road straight to a slight rise north of the fort and this is so now there's
they're they're doing exploring kind of like kid stuff and they go to look at fort lairamy
warned by crazy horse that's the dad and high back bone not to go nearer but it was a good enough
vantage point to see buildings in this rounding area a wide trail led to the fort from the southeast
and a way to the west on the other side of the main area of activity which was among the light
colored buildings and along the trail what were what they could only assumed to be abandoned wagons
they resembled skeletons most of them stripped down of the frames whites were everywhere
along with their horses mules oxen and cattle the occasional barking of dogs reached the boys ears
south of the buildings they could see the tops of several Lakota lodges a few Lakota stayed near
the fort from the days before the soldiers had taken over in the days when it was only a trade
trading town now the rumors were the soldiers had come to protect the travelers along the shell river
trail and again there's he gives a lot of good detail about all the way this settlement is happening
the whites are coming how they're doing it what it looks like to to the Indians
yeah and I'm trying to give enough that you can understand the story
there's a real bad smallpox outbreak prior to this happening a lot of them are just like
just I'm staying away from my people period yeah it's a white-out entire groups of people yeah
yeah they're scared of that they don't want any of that the Lakota called the council at horse
creek the white piece talkers called it the fort Laramie treaty council of 1851 the whites
wanted three things first they wanted no more fighting among the people gathered the black
fleet the black feet and the crow were called upon to live in peace with the Lakota and the
Lakota were in turn to live in peace with the snakes and so on tell the wind to stop blowing
some reacted or the rivers to stop flowing second the whites seem to want to say where the
land ended and where it began by drawing a picture on a parched hide beyond a certain line was
Crowland and behind it was black feet but who could find that line on the earth someone wondered
third the travelers on the shell river trail must not be molested they said for they were
traveling under the protection of the great father who lived in some city far to the east of the
grandfather river the great father would know if his people on the trail were harmed
the trail must be holy in some fashion suggested an old Lakota man Riley
thereafter the shell river trail became known as the holy road for green to these three things
the peacetalker said the great father was empowering them to pay a new eddies that amounted to many
thousands of their money in dollars the newbies would be in the form of food beef cattle flower
and beans for starters and various other goods such as plows hose and other farm implements
there were many raised eyebrows and helpless shrugs at the listening of listing of other goods
but in the end they were accepted very very strange you know like it's just a complete
it's a culture just totally separate even as you're hearing this deal you're thinking
like you're going to say this land is my that's like if you came into me right now and said hey
a jockel give you money for your for the air i'd say uh you want to give me money for air cool
okay you give me money i then also you had some contraption that like sucked the air oh yeah exactly
I was trying to wrap my head around this whole thing and you're that's exactly what's what's
what's going on and it's it's clear that like the whites there they they they obviously weren't
organized and sound kind screwed up too because they had their stuff they were trying to muddle
their way whole things through this this whole mass on like hey we've got a newbies coming and
then they don't show up and they're like uh what's uh the annuity's too is a real good you can see
we're gonna see it throughout this story just the way that we as people if you become
reliant on someone else if you're given stuff you become reliant and you forget how to do things for
yourself you know i don't know if the grand plan of the whites was to get them hooked on these
annuities and then we can just kind of take advantage of i don't know if that was their grand plan
but that's what happens it definitely like it part part of a three-prong strategy one
the annuities which i bet you they were just doing to kind of like calm things down but then it
wound up being like what actually screwed everybody over and it's so reliveent to today
right because these annuities are like the algorithms on social media or they're like fast food
or all kinds of other real easy stuff that's like oh cool i'll just swing through McDonald's
because i'm kind of hungry in not order something healthy off their menu and then
then you messed up yeah i mean anytime this is you know if from a greater perspective
communism right hey look i'm gonna pay you regardless if you do your job well or not
well okay cool i'm not gonna do my job well and you're gonna pay me right that's
great it happens with you know certain positions certain government positions like oh
you're gonna get that you're gonna get that paycheck regardless if you're at the DMV no offense
DMV but if you work at the DMV it doesn't matter if you process
four license applications today or 29 what's your motivation to produce any more stuff if it's
all gonna get taken from you and redistributed then you're just gonna do the minimum
and i think that's what one of the reasons why colonialism is kind of falling on its
face and all it is it's very disturbing so fast forward a little bit each summer's lines and
lines of wagons were not the same as those that had come the summer before they carried a different
group of whites who had never seen a Lakota or a Kaewa or a blue cow cloud but who had been filled
with stories about the dangers from the brown skin mirotters so wide eyed and fearful of
were the whites who arrived at the fort not comforted by the sites of scowling Lakota men
but the Lakota were likewise troubled at the sight of so many white men some of the old ones
would shake their gray heads and speak a warning in any land among any kind of people three human
weaknesses are at the root of trouble fear anger and arrogance right i'll relevant is that to us today
yep fear anger and arrogance those weaknesses were about to be mixed
yeah fear anger and arrogance by the way root cause those obviously arrogance is ego but anger often
also ego and a lot of these circumstances are very egotistical in this book that the anger is triggered
from ego yeah and the hatred which i think kakana is a little bit different but you can attach it
to anger and usually it's rooted in some kind of fear no life has a way of creating strange
circumstances that often lead to a bad end or an unexpected turn when i read that i was like damn it
you know because you don't want to admit that don't want to admit it you don't want to say you know
what let's sometimes things happen that result to a bad end it's such a sad thing to think about
but it's the freaking reality of life so he goes on to this section here
that speaking of anger and fear and arrogance there's a there's a cow that wanders into this
camp and it says it was into conquering bears camp that an old foot sore cow wandered on especially
hot afternoon the Lakota didn't own any cattle of course so it was correctly assumed that she had
been lost or abandoned by some white man trying to escape the barking dogs she was running between
lodges knocking over meat racks after the loft or stop someone realized that although old and thin
she was fresh meat so they you know they kill a cow word of the predicament spread quickly
through the camps because now someone's mad i think believe it was a Mormon they call it they keep
calling the Mormon man a Mormon man wanted the cow he's complaining the soldiers that is cow had
been stolen so word of the predicament quickly spread through the camps the next afternoon the soldiers
started from the fort in two wagons and with two wagon guns but the man leading them was not
flemming this is one of the soldiers that they had worked with or knew it was one called
gratin a new officer lately come from the east with him was a man married to a Lakota woman
a speaks white brought along to translate gratin it was later learned had been loud about his
disdain for the Lakota so you got now an arrogant guy that's also afraid and when the soldiers
reached his camp conquering bear left his lodged to meet them even as they jumped from the wagons
and formed two lines facing the camp the old man was still trying to stop the trouble but his
efforts were ignored meanwhile the speaks white road up and down the line of soldiers shouting
threats in Lakota south of the camp hidden in low shrubbery light hair and lone bear so you got
young crazy horse and his little buddy watched the old man and strained to hear him but couldn't
gratin stepped down from his horse and helped load one of the wagon guns aimed into the camp
the officer shouted the wagon gun blasted and all movement seemed to come to a stop but for a heartbeat
the tops of a lodged lodges poles splintered into many pieces then the soldiers aimed their
rifles and fired before the echo from the wagon gun had faded a astonished and unable to immediately
perceive the reality unfolding before their eyes the two boys watched conquering bear fall back
struck in the chest and stomach the second wagon gun boomed and then the Lakota men reacted
before the soldiers could reload their rifles to fire again a few Lakota guns boomed arrows flew
and then angry men ran toward the scattering soldiers gratin was one of the first to fall
so like that's how things kind of start to go bad in the world it's like a little
misunderstanding then you have that anger that fear that arrogance and initially they tried
at some point prior to this whole thing break and I'm like hey we're going to give you
sorry about the cow we're going to give you a couple of good horses way better than a cow
and our estimation in in trade for that and they're like oh no no that's not going to work
show up and start shooting which obviously does not work nothing work out well for
grab doesn't work out well for grab does it work out well for anybody no
there's a there's certain sections in this book
so there's books there's part of the book he's telling the story of crazy horse and
he's got sections marshals got sections and here called called reflections and he's got
this one section where he kind of gives his perspective on what he on on the events that he's
kind of written about he says and I'm not going to read the whole thing there's a whole bunch of
incredible points that he may express he says crazy horse came into the world at least for
generations ahead of mine he was born in the early 1840s perhaps as late as 1845 I was born in
1945 as Lakota males he and I have much in common enough Lakota culture has survived through
changes during those four generations fortunately to allow my generation to identify strongly
with his so he has like things in common he says this by the time light hair was 10 or 11
euro americans were a consistent presence and an increasing annoyance the Oregon trailer
had been caught across the southern part of the territory beginning the late 1840s it became a steady
stream of white emigrants moving east to west from late spring to mid summer tens of thousands of
people thousands of oxen mules and horses and hundreds of wagons passed through every summer for 20
years those people carried with them many things new to Lakota some beneficial such as
iron knives and cooking pots and some destructive such as liquor and disease most of all they brought change
my grandparents and their generation were not too different from light hairs parents and
grandparents the elderly the Kota of the 1850s in the face of the white incursion and changes brought
to them were telling stories and reminding their children and grandchildren to remember the
trailers they had walked hand crafting a bow out of ash is almost a lost art for the Lakota
my grandfather taught me because his father white tail feather and second father which is a step
father Henry two hawk taught him to make bows and arrows they learned it from their fathers and
grandfather's and the methods and process are the same as those that were taught to light hair
exactly the same each time i've had the opportunity to make a bow a thought invariably passes through
my mind this is the way it has been done for hundreds of generations i make my bows the same way
crazy horse did that is only one of the many connections i have with him as Lakota boys
there's a great discussion somewhere in this book where they're talking about the elders and they're
talking specifically about change they're like hey we used to use lances to hunt the buffalo
before we came up with bows and arrows and we transitioned over that so we've got to be ready
to change as things as things come along and they give that historical example and that's a
struggle isn't it when when we think of valued traditions that we have in our culture
like what what do we strive to hold on to and and what do we let go of as we grow yeah and there's
i i don't remember if i'm going to cover this or not but i'll bring it up right now one of those
same just types of discussions they're talking about there's a time when it's time to get on the new horse
and like the old horse isn't working anymore you gotta get on a new horse and and that's a
good expression to keep in your mind because you're riding that horse and it's starting to fade or
it's not able to do it's job anymore yet got again on a new horse even though you're comfortable
with your old horse even though you that old horse's been good to you it's not going to work out anymore
you've got to be ready to transition to the new horse getting now back into the the story
out of the reflections and back into the story light hair had been in the camp but a few days
when a rating party prepared to go against the pony and omaha who had become too daring of late
coming north well past the running water he accepted the invitation to go along the raiders in the
eat the raiders went east toward the loop river an area of rolling hills and tall grass and many
deer there they separated into two groups one turned south to probe into pony country and the other
with spotted tail and iron shell leading had spotted an omaha camp in the breaks of the east in
the breaks east of the loop a small number of the group crept close to the camp while the rest
hidden weighted light hair was won staying close to his uncle they crawled in among the horse
heard and slowly cut the hobbles from the horses legs and chased them out of the camp
though the omaha didn't immediately respond a large contingent soon started out to recover
their horses spotted tails group waited a little longer than attacked the camp the few omaha
men left in camp fought hard but so did the Lakota spotted tail charged several times on horse
back alone and light hair claimed his first victory as a fighting man and omaha tried to attack
through some tall grass but light hair stopped him with a well placed arrow the confusion and chaos
delayed his reaction what he had just done though he was vaguely aware of the man's death throws
seized by a sudden bravado he crawled through the grass to take the scalp of his first kill
a wave of sickness swept through him the dead omaha was a young woman
he turned away the fighting was over the raided been successful though the omaha had recovered
some of their horses spotted tails daring and courage was the talk around the fire light hair
sat quietly wrestling with the reality of taking a human life like all newcomers to it he had
learned something about the unfettered violence of combat ordinary perception did not exist
and senses became confused the omaha who attacked him seemed to move so swiftly two swiftly
for a developer at reaction on the other hand when he had let go of her head because he didn't
want her scalp everything around him seemed to move very very slowly her hair was soft thick and very
long light hair said nothing although he knew the overall outcome of the raided been good
they had no they had new horses and no one had been hurt but the face of the dead girl stayed in his mind
it's a humbling experience for him and he they go into it and we'll get to some of these parts
but you know when they get done with a battle they go back and kind of tell stories and that's the
norm and he's already a quiet kid and this just solidifies the fact that he's not going to talk
about what he's doing a man from the fort came looking for iron shell with a message from the
French trader burdo the long knives and it's a the long knives what they call the the soldiers because
they have long swords they call long knives they call the soldiers long knives the long knives had
received word that the great father which is basically when they say that they're talking about
the president or at least some form of the supreme government of America the great father was
very angry over the killing of gratin and his soldiers more soldiers were being sent and their purpose
was to punish those who had done the killing it was an ominous message but not won totally unexpected
had the great father been told that the soldier gratin had to open fire first had the great father
been told that more than adequate payment had been offered several times for the worst the worthless
cow of the Mormon white man why should the great father care about such facts someone asked that
was the problem everyone agreed the whites had one truth and the Lakota another
yeah having talking about that quite a bit especially on the academy
I haven't used those terms you know I have one truth and you have another but I was say
I have one perspective and you have another perspective and if you think that your perspective
is the right one you're you're not correct I mean it's literally not if you can't say that
you can't look at something you can't look at a situation you can't look at a plan you can't look at an
idea you can't look at a scenario and say oh I see everything and I understand it
the the old saying there's two sides to every story actually there's 48 sides to a story
yeah right there's all these different sides and when these things break down
it's because you're not listening to other sides of the story it's not you you're believing your own
story your own side of the story and you can't let that happen and you have to you have to put
into your calculus that other people see things differently if you don't put out in your calculus
you're not going to get the right answer so many of these wars so many wars are just
misunderstanding start with just a straight-up misunderstanding or a little incident that could be
de-escalated it just turns into the freaking disaster summer past light hair Guitoller his voice
deepened and he walked with a sure step when there was dancing he stayed in the shadow satisfied only to watch
light hair fast forward a little light light hair remounted and put his horse into a gallop
from another and higher vantage point he could see that smoke was rising from the encampments so
he's out on like a little personal patrol of his own which is he that's another thing I haven't
done a good job indicating he likes to be by himself so he goes out and hunts by himself he goes
out in the woods and just sets by himself he likes he's kind of a loner so he's out on one of
these sort of solo operations and he says from another and higher vantage point he could see that
smoke was rising from the encampment a few hurs horses were scattered about watching to the north but
there was nothing else no children playing no dogs running about leaving his horse hobbled he ran
toward the camp light was fading a dog bark tentatively and a stench hung in the air among the
smoking lodges and collapse poles were objects scattered over the ground whatever had happened was over
and eerie silence hung over the camp nothing was moving the horses he had spotted earlier had
not moved they were still gazing and tantly at something toward the north light hair entered
the camp the objects seen from a distance now took distinct shapes they were raw hide meat containers
willow chairs clothing containers robes and cradle boards scattered indiscriminately as if by a
sudden angry wind but it hadn't been a wind someone had attacked the encampment the horses had
been telling him something looking north as they had he walked over to a hobbled mayor she appeared
on harm so he fashioned a jaw rope untied the hobbles swung onto her back and urged her into a
lope toward the north where there had been movement earlier if the people in the camp were running
away they would be moving as fast as possible in a bear patch of ground he saw the grooves
left by a pair of drag poles pausing to look he saw other signs of drag poles then he saw
something else even in the fading light the distinctive prints of the metal shoes worn by long
knife horses unless soldiers had taken a pulling dragging poles something wasn't right throwing
caution aside light hair galloped in the direction of the signs and at the second or third hill he saw
them people were walking and leading a few horses pulling loaded drag poles though it was
difficult to count how many they were but on either side was a column of mounted soldiers they were
heading northwest most of the men from little funders camp had been away hunting some of them were
bound to return sooner or later but for the time being light hair was alone he returned for his own
horse so he could take too long to follow his relatives who are captives of the long knives
back at the burned out camp he retrieved his gilding and gathered stones from several cooking
fires and built a marker pointing it to the northwest and he wouldn't know to go in that direction
especially given the condition of the camp he had only been in the south end of the camp so he
led his horse through it to the north end the mayor snorted in apprehension and shied away from a
long dark object on the ground light hair bent to it and felt the leg it was a woman she was dead
he discerned other shapes in the growing darkness and went to them they were all dead
he wretched after he bent low over a woman and realized that both her breasts had been cut off
searching in the growing darkness he found one dead body after another all of them scalloped
or mutilated in some fashion he wretched again and sat for some time before he pulled a row
back from the next body a child this time perhaps ten gathering his horses he walked out of the camp
he had covered everybody he found covering the shame of the insults they had suffered after the pain of death
with the shock and the grief came another feeling starting like a small cloud growing over the
horizon anger so that's gonna leave a mark you get to a point where there's a trajectory
where it's almost impossible to stop the direction that things are going and when stuff happens like that
what are you gonna do I mean you you you you
through this book you you have a problem because there's this clash of cultures
and the Lakota have a culture that that they're involved with raiding they're going up and
raiding the crow they're they're raiding the uh um the snakes the snakes and the crow are
raiding them back and it's just what they kind of do and there's an equilibrium there because
they're not industrial and they can't like mechanize death the way the Europeans are capable
at at the time yeah and they don't understand it and there's like a he doesn't say this at all
but you can assemble it there's an ROI like a legit rules of engagement that they're following
and you don't either there's just things that you don't do and there's times where he mentions in
the book they're going to they're going on a raid to like to stay sharp yeah like hey we're just
hey look this is like a training op but it's real and they're gonna go do it and and the other
the other tribes kind of know that's hey this is part of what we do oh this is oh they're
gonna run a training op we're gonna have to get some but there's rules of engagement and there's
there's like um hey we're gonna go in we got some horses from you cool we're not slaughtering
your people we got we we needed horses so we got some horses from right that's what we're doing
oh we want we want you know some of the meat that you that you hunted okay cool we didn't get
enough so we're gonna go take some of yours it's it's like there's rules of engagement that
they're all operating on they were I think it was fairly common too when you raid like
they mentioned in here and he leaves out like we attacked the village and there were no men left
in the village are very few of them well what what did you do exactly and I don't think it was
uncommon for them to snatch slaves up at a minimum from other villages I think you know the
empire the summer moon which is another great book the command she were grabbing people from
everywhere and then they would just assimilate I'm kind of in the tribe but they also did a lot of
slave trading and other things at the time so there's no one that's completely clean in this whole
situation and yeah it's just it's it's an interesting study that on all this stuff and how do
you stop it once once that boulders rolling downhill I like you he comes in and he finds all the
mutilated women like how do you put that fire out now it's gonna be rough
there's a guy named harney the gizapp caramel maybe a general general general harney
early in the morning soldiers had been seen moving up blue water spotted tail and iron
shell and a few warrior leaders rode out under a white banner to talk of troops to talk
the leader of the soldiers was a white haired man and bearded older man who said his name was
general harney and they eventually put two and two together that this is the guy that led this raid
or did come harney had stopped at Fort Laramie since he was the leader of the soldiers he declared
an end to trading with the Lakota still demanding the surrender of the killers of grapon
when the story of the attack on little funders camp on the on the blue water was carried north
to the other Lakota camps general harney was given a new name to the Lakota he would always be known
as woman killer so the fact that they're given him that specific name probably is an
indicator that that's not common practice for them to kill him no that's not saying there's
our oeze man that there were violate big time one evening he returned from a long outing with
high backbone and waited for his father in the large large when crazy horse that's the dad
returned the boy held out a bundle of tobacco it was a gift and offering to a holy man
when one needed to speak from one's heart light hair needed to tell of a dream a dream that it
come to him the second night he had spent alone on a sandstone bluff it had been with him every
day and night for these many months he told his father dreams were important crazy horse said
as he as he took the offering of tobacco from his oldest son so now we get into this dream
the dream was not difficult to remember and this dream is like the central theme of this book so
the dream was not difficult to remember only to tell it had been a part of the boy since the late
summer night near the sand hill country when old conquering beer bear lay dying in camp after the
incident with the soldiers with the soldier gratin in his men he was almost embarrassed to describe it
the dream began at a lake a small still lake bursting upward from the blue calmness
a horse and its writer broke through the surface and rode out across the land the writer was a man
a slender man who wore his hair loose a stone was tied behind his left ear a reddish brown stone
a lightning mark was painted across one side of his face on his bare chest were blue hailstones
behind him behind them to the west as they galloped was a dark rolling cloud rising higher and higher
from it came the deep rumble of thunder and flashes of lightning the horse was strong and swift
and changed its colors red yellow black white and blue bullets and arrows suddenly filled the air
flying at the horse and writer but they all passed without touching them close above them
through a red tailed hawk sending out its shrill cry people his own kind suddenly rose up all around
and grabbed the writer pulling him down from behind the dream ended there seemed to be a warning
in the dream but glorious warrior in the dream was grown but still young the faces of the
enemies that it sent bullets and arrows at him were not visible but the people who had pulled
him down were like the writer himself they were easily seen as was the horse the hawk and the
thunder's the thunder's they were the powerful beings that lived in the west perhaps the most
powerful of all beings ever anywhere rarely did anyone dream of the thunder's and anyone who did
had a special calling to be a sacred clown the one who did the opposite of what was expected light
hered described the lightning mark on the dream writers face as well as blue hailstones painted
across across his chest lightning and hail were both strongly associated with the thunder's
crazy horse the door crazy horse closed the door and began singing again
and another gathering song to call in the spirits he poured water on the stones sending steam
and new waves of heat rolling inside the tiny enclosure light heren dirt the heat even as he had
held the dream in his mind's eye as his father had instructed him to do dying gloriously
making the ultimate sacrifice in defense of the people was the secret dream of every Lakota fighting
man it was the warrior code repeated in all the honoring songs the dream seemed to suggest that the
dreamer would gain honor and immortality by living and dying as a warrior but perhaps there was more
to the dream perhaps there was a warning of a path that could not be avoided
so there's a lot of foreshadowing in that dream of his life that he's not going to live very
long and not going to live to old age and the scariest thing I guess is the fact that people his own
kind are the people that kind of drag him down from behind
and you know this this got me to thinking you know when I had when I had a mica
think on the podcast and I started off by reading some stuff that he's either said or written
and that was that one quote this native American quote and I don't know which tribe it came from
and I didn't research it but the quote is a diagnosis becomes a curse basically when you diagnose
someone with something it can become a curse a self fulfilling prophecy you know and that's
something to look out for you know it's something to look out for yeah it's it's um I think it's better
as we go through the story to discuss it later the struggle that the tribe has between
the folks that are going to the take the free annuities and the folks that are deciding to live wild
and then that friction and that friction corrods them from the inside out yeah and man the
egos that come into play are just very disturbing mentioned he's a few more characters coming
to play even in the company of heat dog and lone bear light hair laughed and smiled less
often and didn't participate in their banter as much as he usually did this after he kind of
reports his dream to his dad his friends knew that crazy horse had taken light hair off somewhere
for several days and at since returning their light hair friend was less communicative but they
also knew that he always tried harder to win the games the boys played to emulate warriors
in fact he rarely lost he was not always the fastest or the quickest or the best shot but he
simply kept trying and though he didn't tell them what to do they still followed him because
he didn't hesitate to take the lead he seemed to know instinctively the best trail to follow
or the best way to do something word of light hair's dream had quietly spread among the fighting
men sooner later some said the boy would have to put his medicine to the test there was only one
way to see if the enemies bullets and arrows would not strike him so preparations were made for
raid north into crowlands crazy horse and little hawk had found a reddish brownstone for light
hair to wear behind his left ear and taught him how to paint lightning and hail stone marks
from his dream then a bullet gona stray while someone was practicing grazed light hairs knee
it's like friendly fire scenario someone's out just training and get and crazed and light hair
get shot though crazy horse says dad treated the wound carefully to him it was a sign
a worrisome sign directly related to the people in the dream pulling the rider down
for the dreamer there would be danger or harm from his own kind we get into the love story part of
this scenario it's also tragic in many ways news is buzzing about a prominent family planning
a coming out serenote ceremony for a favorite daughter there would be much feasting and dancing
red cloud was an impressive figure of a man and had reputation as an orator he was the head of a
large family and some would say he would be an important man for years to come so it was only natural
that the people were excited that his niece black buffalo woman was to be honored
as a tiny doide girl she'd cross light hairs path now and then now she was a beautiful willy
girl with long glistening black hair light hair hung back as the crowd moved away and managed to
catch a glimpse of her dress and a finally be to dress her hair in too long braids hanging down
over her breast signifying she was now a woman that evening light hair stayed in the back of the
crowd during the dancing black buffalo woman's brothers her father and her uncle stayed close to
hers or a reminder that any would be suitor could count on having to prove his worth in order
to become part of that family so he's got a little love interest black buffalo woman
fast forward a little bit waiting for his first test to battle light hair watch for the signal
from high backbone a stone's throat was right he had stripped to his breach cloth and and
moccasins his hair loose in the manner of his dream and the lightning mark and hailstones painted
on his chest at the back of his head he wore the tail feathers from a red tailed hawk pointing
down as when the hawk was about to strike his prey behind his left ear was the reddish brown stone
and his right handy held the bow two arrows against his palm and a thirmed clamped in his teeth
his quiver bristling with arrows was tied to the front of his waist to be an easy reach
a shout came from high backbone as he urged his his mount into a gallop to take him up the slope
light hair and others did the same strangely each rider had only a vago awareness of the others
though they could hear clearly dozens of hooves clathering on the rocky slope low angry sounded
humming noises buzzed past their ears the the experience fighting men knew it was the sound of
passing balls from enemy muzzle loaders the gunshots could be heard less than a heartbeat later
a man with a gun stepped out from behind a rock light hairs shot was pure instinct and he didn't
see if the arrow had hit his target his horse pitched forward the enemy who stepped from behind
the rock had managed to shoot the animal in the chest light hair rolled across the rocky slope
his horse was dead his bow was gone he quickly sliced the drag rope from his horse and ran down
the slope first in one direction then another a loose horse came out of nowhere and he managed
to grab a handful of mane and swing on there was gunfire from below an answering fire from the
rocks at the top of the hill the horse was rushing up the slope in a blind panic and took his new
rider among the rocks you got a commentary on grabbing a horse by the man just like that is so cool
that that and it's not his horse it's just the guy so good he's grabbing any horse it comes by by the
main just hopping on swing back up back into the fight the pistol he snapped off a shot with his pistol
he snapped off a shot in a man who doubled over from the impact of the bullet gaining control of
the horse he raised down the slope stopping to recover his bow his quiver was still tied to his waste
high back bone joined him his horse winded together they charged up the slope again in and among the
rocks this time light hair used his bow and put an arrow through an enemy's chest gunshots
ring out from among the rocks and up from the slope bullets splattered against the boulders or
shattered on small rocks on the ground unable to load another arrow light hair used his pistol again
and another of the enemy went down light hair jumped from his horse to grab the hair of the dead
enemy a quick swipe with his knife separated a patch of scalp as he ran toward a second body
and grabbed another handful of hair a sharp smashing blow to his leg knocked him over he went down
and a heap but hurly got to his feet shouts and gunfire continued bouncing off the boulders all
around light hair went from boulder to boulder as gunfire waned and then he hobbled down the slope
the fight was over every one of the enemies had been killed the Lakota rode among the rocks on the
hill to make certain and then came down to gather around light hair most of them had seen him in the
fight the bullets and arrows had not touched him except when he tried to take a second scalp
his dream was true they decided high backbone took the scalps from him and cleaned the wound in his
lower leg someone rounded up light hairs new horse and they all rode away from the hill a few
scalps dangling from lances or belts horses and guns were the prize as well as the emergence
of a new warrior among them that night around the fire the full impact of the battle settled
in like an uninvited and unwelcome history men had been killed light hair killed two men
the second and third human beings he had ever killed the first was the Omaha girl in the country
far to the east three years past ghosts the old warrior say were the price of fighting man
paid to follow the path of the warrior somewhere behind the noble and espalze traditions
somewhere behind the achievements and the glory the ghosts waited and they would always be there
their dying would forever be a part of the path of the man who took their lives whether the act
was honorable or justified or not their faces and often their dying moments could not be forgotten
unless the heart of the warrior was made of stone and few could boast of that though many might have
secretly wished it to be so somewhere people they didn't know wives and daughters mothers and grand
daughters would mourn they would whale and gash themselves their hearts torn in anguish
the path of the warrior was indeed strewn with broken hearts like so many stones on a long and
winding trail the victory dances honored the warrior and the victory story stories reaffirmed
the tradition of the warrior but very little if anything could chase away the dark men or
memories that always lurked the ghost would always dull the edge of arrogance and bring a cold
feeling at the most unexpected moments such was the price of being a warrior
you know as you read not and you think about he gets dressed up for battle you know
he's they're doing their war pain and it's part of a ritual that they're going through
before they go into that and I think the ritual is probably really important to the human psyche
to help you set aside some of the fear and the other things and maybe it might even help you with
those ghosts a little bit remember on one of the early podcasts somebody asked if you had a
ritual before you went out on ops and I think there is one that a lot of people practice and it was
like I'm going to change out all my batteries I'm going to get all the old battle maps out of my
gear and I'm going to put the new battle map and new comp plan and I'm going to go check my
radio and then we have this ritual that develops it's it's like reinforcing that we're all getting
ready to go out in the battlefield because they're like one of the last things we do before we get
in the vehicles are getting the helicopters is we get together and we do comp checks we're saying
to each other hey I want to make sure that you know that I can talk to you and then I know that
you can talk to me and when you need help I'll hear you and I'll come right and that it's a different
kind of ritual but it's actually kind of the same where we present ourselves for inspection
from each other like hey check my gear out and all of us sometimes some platoons run differently
where they'll have one guy check it out but every platoon has a system where you present yourself
and you do all these this ritual to get ready to go into combat and then you present yourself to
your your teammate like hey check me out make sure I'm screwed away and and then I'll check you out
and then we're in that we're kind of reaffirming all of our bonds and getting ready to go
into the belly of the beast yeah it's probably worth noting as a leader to make that a little
bit more ritualistic right so what can you do to make it a little bit more ritualistic and
I did this my first deployment to Iraq where we would before we'd get in the vehicles it was
world roll call like we would stand like we'd all stand around the board with the vehicles
on it and it was you know gardener you know willing air you know just going through
that roll call that yep we're all here we all know what vehicles were in this is just going out tonight
and we for some reason in in in Rmadi we didn't do quite that ritualistic roll call
we had come up with a more decentralized system for yep everyone's good to go you know
probably just the vehicles you know one you know six up five's up four's up three's up two's up one
we're good to go we don't need to have everyone stand around but as you're talking through this
that little nice little ritual was a good thing and it gives you a you know I now've talked
about this before the fact that in America we don't really have a ritualistic solid ritualistic
to wait to deal with death there's not a protocol to follow of what you're supposed to do
and it and it can I think leave a lot of open ends and a lot of loose strings because other
cultures have hey this day we're going to do this kind of celebration we're going to say this prayer
we're going to go to this place we're going to do this thing and then it's over it doesn't make
any sense does it because dying is as natural as being born yeah and why don't we
like it's just like this weird gap that we have where we haven't set up this away for us to just
cope with it yeah and and and even you know we have some rituals like in the sealed teams like
okay we're going to go to the funeral we're going to we're going to put the tried it you know
we're going to pound our tridents into the casket like those are awesome things but it's almost like
the ritual we need to have completion where you say hey once you put that tried it in the
casket and you bury that casket you know now you've you've let that part of of that warrior go
and now you can move forward whatever the saying should be or whatever the the ritual because
you don't really know that you know no one said like hey man once you do that it's okay you've
given you've given that warrior the the most respect you can give me you've given him him
the most meaningful thing to you which is your trident you've given it to him you're going to
bury him with your trident you're going to be with him forever and now you go back to doing your
job I kind of feel that way you know I felt some level of closure when I've done that but
if it was a little bit more if it was a little bit more codified it might be even more healthy
for guys so I think the idea of rituals are so helpful in everyday life you know if you've
got some rituals to follow me people have all kinds of little rituals they follow in everyday life
right and get up I brush my teeth you know I do a certain I put on like I wear the same clothes all
time to work out you know I mean I have these little rituals and I pretty much wear the same clothes
every day by the way but you got these rituals like this is what I'm going to do and it makes
things easier and it allows your mind to sort of follow a of a path that that is already known
and I think that's really healthy and I think that would help people a lot you know
it and it's what's what's so cool what's so cool is getting these windows and what's really cool
about the story of crazy horses it was written by a Lakota and then we get a window into their
culture it's not that much different than ours we'd grief they're talking about that their
virtues are generosity and courage I think we see that as a virtue too right they come back
from more they have PTSD by the way yes and so as they're talking about the things that these are
holding up as high standards or things that we hold up as high standards as well yeah it's worth
if you're if you're in a leadership position of the more ritual you can establish without getting
crazy you know without getting crazy we don't know create rituals for no reason we also want to
create rituals that become um constructive but putting some rituals in place is a positive thing
definitely speaking of rituals that night there was a victory dance high backbone and the others
described the battle and their parts in it for enemy warriors had been killed and by the way they were
fine I didn't I did a bad job they were fighting against uh same snakes yeah it was snakes that
they were fighting against snake tribe for enemy warriors had been killed guns and horses had been
captured everyone waited for the son of crazy horse to tell of his deeds since according to the
other men he had turned the flow of the battle but the boy hung back reluctant to talk
waning with humility he goes asleep fast forward a little bit the son was high when he
finally roused himself the pain in his leg had diminished somewhat and he managed to doze off a little
he sipped he from the horn cup someone had left by the fire pit and finally dressed he stepped out
from the lodge and was surprised to see a crowd gathered in the camp circle at the edge of
it stood his father wearing his best medicine robe decorated with long strands of horse hair
a trilling arose among the women his mother stood behind his father gentle smiles on their faces
and unmasked pride as well crazy horse lifted his voice in a warrior's honoring song joined
by his wives and light hairs sister after the song came more shouts and war hoops and trilling
crazy horse lifted his hand and walked forward and faced the crowd I give my first son a new name
this day he said raising his voice I have heard the story of the brave things he did I am proud
his mothers are proud all of his family and friends are proud of our young man so this day I
give him a new name I give him the name of his father and his fathers before him from this day
forward I call him crazy horse from somewhere in the crowd a drum pounded and another honoring song
was raised and the crowd surged forward high backbone little hawk he dog and lone bear were among the
many who came forward smiling crazy horse the name flowed like water over the rocks
there's a little ritual activity that was a whole scene I'm looking to get out staying
welcome into the club man and this is equally awesome or at least get in close so the father
passed on the name and took for himself another worm a name of utmost humility in time even that
name would have meaning for he would be known as worm the father of crazy horse is like epic
use gay is call me worm that's where we're at that's the humility level happening around here
hey echo can I ask you about a movie yes of course good fellas yes there's that scene where
the main character goes to jail and he's just locked up for a little time but he doesn't say anything
and then when he gets let's let out everybody's yeah yeah when he was a kid that's when he's a kid
pop your chair yeah yeah good good scene yeah there's something about that this is another thing we
don't do great in America you're a man now type thing that ceremony that thing you're a woman now
you can see they did it for for both black buffalo woman and you know like okay this is it
you're you're responsible now we don't do a great job of that I went through something like that
in the Catholic Church where I did confirmation and and and so different cultures have got it
but as it has we've kind of morphed away from that it's something that we've lost so how do we
how do we replace it and in a way it's got to be something that you earn right it's so much better
if you're earning for sure for sure it shouldn't just be like okay time and rate you turned
you turned seven you're a man now yeah isn't graduating high school kind of like that though yeah true
I mean I guess in certain families right but you graduate high school they give you like a bunch of
stuff and then your uncle or whoever gives you like advice it's like an actual thing
I do lose a podcast on advice you got from your uncle when you graduated high school became a man
bro that might be a whole podcast series I'm just saying you know you well oh you didn't get
advice from your uncle no sir oh not me I'm just saying you have a lot of extended family or I'm
grown up oh no no not really and I didn't either but that's like some people doing that's a
great benefit because then there's all these adults putting good stuff into the kids here so like
they you read in this book where there's everybody's talking so everything's kind of common knowledge
and everybody's involved in developing well one of the things uh in Hawaii it's very common to call
like if you ever respected family friend or friends that come around you call them uncle or
a handy hundred percent like I didn't even know uncle was my mom and dad's brother sister or
I'm gonna just like I didn't know that and so like in the do it yeah yeah but it's it feels more
solidified in Hawaii because like I was like 10 maybe 11 before I realized oh wait like uncle is like
if you're actually related to them yeah you just call there's people now even that I still call
uncle Jill uncle whatever like you can't help it but um yeah so I mean it's in a way it's kind of
this kind of same thing yeah when you go grab when you graduate they're all there and they give you
you know all the stuff I get I got my lunch I got put and check on that stuff by my wife
but because when I saw them it was like six and I was treating like a team guy and my wife's like
he's taking six and he's like oh like well still it should still be up to three you know
she just had like crushed me and I was just really sorry about that I mean you know you have to be
smart enough to listen I had to think through it I had to think through it and I was like well
wait a second when I was seven I realized I was like oh my god I'm an idiot because I was thinking
you know why would you not just do you know why would you not get up at four in the morning
and I'm like bro was I when I was seven I didn't even have any concept of any of that you know
there was a little boy and there was looking at my kid like you better get up to sleep yeah
don't you want to talk to you what you this candle bills for you son as you can't respond
because you can't talk yet you know little kids have blankets did any of your
junior kids have a blanket yeah my mom that's a big thing with my mom's she got the kids
their special blanket and but it it wasn't like a security thing or not okay so one of my
kid I think my um second daughter had like a blanket that went with her everywhere my first daughter
not so much I didn't know what was gonna happen with my son so so I got him like this old school
like S.A.S. Freaking scarf thing and I was like if you need to blink it's gonna be freaking
tactical you know what he rejected he never had a he never had like that that uh he never utilized it
really yeah well no no he was my one of my daughter that had the blanket that really
carried it everywhere it was what is it called knitted it was knitted it had kind of like big
croissants had big knots so you could kind of he should constantly be uh fumbling with them right
more like so yeah so but and the S.A.S. thing kind of had some little things that said you know that'll
be you know helps the dexterity or work on dexterity young age you want to be working
your grip strength so in my life like you are such a wrecking idiot so there you go yeah but he was
definitely your son from straight away because I remember him coming over early on and I had like a
hatchet laying around and you're like my you can't have that hatchet he had he'd already grabbed
and he got it from a real quick right before our pop belly picked right to eat him.
My favorite cameo we saw one of our old neighbors a great friends of the family great great
people and they were like yeah we were looking through pictures the other day and he had a picture
of my kid at he had walked over to their house and he's like six and he's got a naked Barbie
hammer and a nail he says can Shane come and play and there and Darren goes yeah he can hold on a second
and went and took a picture. This is just too awesome he's simply can pour a little Barbie dolls
about to get crucified twisted times okay going back to the book there there's a they're doing a
raid once again on the snakes you know to your point Jason this is what they were doing
yeah it's not like all the all the the Indians were out there comb by odd just you know living in
peace and harmony they were killing each other and that's what's going on here um they got a raid
they're on a raid on the snakes it's going sideways crazy horse found good cover boots soon surrounded
and his horse had been captured incoming fire prevented him from reloading his rifle without a
horse his odds of survival were greatly reduced his best chance was to move out of harm's way but he
knew he had that quickly the sound of distant gunfire was growing fainer meaning the herd of new
Lakota horses and most of the raiders were now well to the north he and a few of the other Lakota's
in the trees were left on their own with more snakes arriving moving from tree to tree he waited
for a snake warrior to pass close and jump behind him onto the horse dispatching the man with one
swing of his stone headed war club do any commentary on that besides us yeah how are you
jumping onto the horse that's just like athletic prowess as well pulling out his pistol the
open fire to distract the snake circling outside the trees and shouted for the Lakota to make
their escape making the break from the trees crazy horse and his companions gained a good head start
before the snakes could regroup the snakes continued to pursue the herd and at one point managed
to recover a few of their horses but they had lost several more men and soon disengaged never in
recent memory had the Ogilawla Lakota taken so many horses in one raid but they had suffered
losses as well with at least five men killed victory stories abounded and the dances went far
into the night the Lakota learned that one of the snake casualties was the son of their head man
the young man had been one of the first to pursue the Lakota once more young crazy horse did not
participate in the dancing in fact he said nothing even to his father about the new horse he was
riding or the new muzzle loaded loading rifle he had brought back warm could only guess how is
son of the choir them until one of crazy horses companions who had been in the trees surrounded
by the snakes told him what he had witnessed that the young man had unhorsed the snake and
captured the gun in one daring moment his action had saved them all the man was certain
this is just a good methodology for life if you talk about how awesome you are you're degrading
your level of respect as a human so just don't do it it's just better just to not say anything
awesome is that is this situation because crazy horse just rolls back in with a brand new horse
a brand new rifle and doesn't even tell us that that he did this thing and he has to hear it second hand
12 years of one-on-one instruction provided by provided any Lakota male the basic physical skills
to be a fighting man by the age of 15 or 16 any boy was proficient with all of his weapons
but unseen factors determined how each would be warrior would handle live combat
after the first few encounters with enemies on the battlefield young crazy horse had demonstrated
qualities that he looted many men for an entire lifetime older experienced men while initially
impressed waited to pass judgment however it was not usual for young men to perform well in their
first face to face encounters with enemies if for no other reason then that their inexperienced
made them less cautious then the daunting realities of combat became part of their thinking
and the same young men who seemed so daring and reckless and their first few outings hesitated
taking stock before taking action caution was good it turned reckless boys into thinking man and a
thinking man was overall more valuable on the battlefield than one who placed others in danger
because he took unnecessary risks so the old man who heard so the old man who heard of the first
exploits of young crazy horse not at knowingly remembering that such and such had started the same
way and now he was a man with a family because there was little more to life than glory on the battlefield
some wisdom from these from these folks they know what's up the reckless
die young the old men advised and their only legacy is a brief moment of glory but it's over time
it's forgotten it is the steady and the steadfast that prevail the old one say so while it's
started the heart and the imagination to hear of the exploits of a new young warrior one whose quiet
ways and camp contradicted the stories of daring on the battlefield the old men puffed on their
pipes as they sat around the evening fires and not at knowingly over time young crazy horse
would give up his reckless ways they said everyone does not quiet everyone
meanwhile the lines of suitors at the lodge of black buffalo woman were as long as ever
she's square it away and the town or the village is kind of taking notice at time went by
even the staunch of skeptics agreed that black buffalo woman and the stalwart young crazy horse
were a good match and that she would do well to bring such a man into her family
but there were still many whispers behind the hand that her family had plans that didn't take
the girl's own feelings into consideration one of the suitors was no water
who of his own accord was by no was no comparison to crazy horse but no water's older brother
black twin was a skilled orator and a man of growing influence and he held many opinions
solidly in line with those of red cloud so no water was suddenly a valuable man
there was nothing for anyone to do but wait and watch with great interest
has to what would happen so you got crazy horse he's sort of the
he's like the warrior in this scenario and then no water who has a little bit of prestige
some family connections and there's a there's a mystery as to what's going to happen and who's going to end up
getting black buffalo woman
going out the field again scouts from one of the camps along the powder river met the returning
warriors and were quickly sent back to spread the news of success but before he left
one of the scouts let slip a bit of news from the red cloud camp that was like an arrow into the
heart of young crazy horse no water the younger brother of black twin had become the husband
of black buffalo woman out on deployment and he was supposed to go on that deployment and
suddenly got it two things yeah he got a two thing all about to the camp and then even Mary
black buffalo woman dirty trick joddy always there a stain in camp yeah
uh the grain of hope that light hair dared to allow himself hold to hold in his heart
had grown into distinct possibility when as crazy horse he joined a line of y'all of hopefully
young men waiting outside the girls lodge that grain of hope had grown even more each time she stood
with him under his courting robe and seemed reluctant to leave his embrace or perhaps it was only
as imagination this would not be the first time imagination totally ignored his imagination totally
ignored the boundaries and limits of reality so he's gets heartbroken half a month later you return
fast forward a little bit uh crazy horse said nothing of the trail he had traveled for nearly
a month that for nearly half a month warm new that the broken heart was not completely healed
the perhaps never would be but he knew as all fathers do that sometimes the best medicine for
such a wound was life itself some good advice right there yeah because he'd left he'd gone out
kind of just on his own for a few weeks to get get over the the heartbreak you know's a little bit
of rating all one is out of two yeah just just just some little operations
up um more good comments here a wound on the outside can be watched to see that it heals
well as everyone knew wounds on the on inside could not be seen but for pain in the eyes
several months had passed since black buffalo woman had taken no waters or husband soon after they
had moved away for as everyone knew no water was afraid of crazy horse the old women knew
that best of all but if they're young man as they called crazy horse bore any ill will it could
not be seen in the way he conducted himself or heard in any words he had spoken so they hoped
that the wound inflicted by black buffalo woman was healed though some didn't blame her she was
after all only 16 and how could one so young stand up to the powerful ambitions of her father
and uncle um rolling into the back and one of the reflections sections here and and again um
skipping a bunch of stuff um but wanted to talk about this part where he says where Marshall says
the seeking of a vision is a serious highly ritualized process undertaken respectfully
prayerfully and under the guidance of a medicine man to seek a vision is to seek guidance for
one's life or to answer a problem or predicament young light hair was probably afraid that the
dream he had that night he spent a top of sandstone but but but would not be taken seriously
because he had not followed all the rules but it came nonetheless the dream that vision has been
told and retold thousands of times since the fact of the matter is that we cannot be certain of the
exact description of light hair that light hair later gave to his father further more
discrradical to understand that much of the discussion and interpretation of the vision has occurred
and is still occurring since crazy horse death there are those who see the vision as a foretelling
almost a blow by blow revelation of what lay ahead for light hair it depicts an powerful
locata warrior rising out of the lake during a thunderstorm on a horse that changes colors
riding on skewed through a hail of arrows and bullets until he's eventually pulled down by his
own kind grabbing and holding back his arms the vision might have been as much a consequence of
wishful thinking as it is a glimpse into the future for every locata boy grew up with dreams of
being a warrior and winning glory and honor on the battlefield light hair was no different one
elderly locata story teller was the opinion that light hair and his father chose not to tell
everything about the vision speculating that a warning was part of it a warning that the boy would
die as a young man in his prime such a warning could explain crazy horses daring and often
reckless exploits in combat as a younger fighting man perhaps he believed each time he was about
to perform the last act of his life and wanted to be powerful and meaningful
now man the guy's got a broken heart at this point and essentially like they're talking about
these other warriors get a family in that now they got something to lose and crazy horse doesn't
it's like the classic but I don't want to take that take that away from his courage or bravery
or anything else either yeah the classic you know team guy on the ragged edge with nothing
to lose so I have that's like hey ready to go getting back into the story crazy horse decided to see
for himself how things were at for laryming he found a loafer camp which is these are like
Indian camps that are right outside and they're friendly with the whites and make deals with the
whites and they kind of live off the whites they're all loafers he found a loafer camp a short
way from the fort and stayed with them a few days to hear what they knew a newbies were laid again
they complained and the long horn cattle were skinnier every year they noticed not without
some degree of envy that while crazy horse carried a rifle and a pistol and a far-seeing glass
he was not dressed in white man's clothes as they were he reminded them he was a hunter
though some of them took this remark as an insult others knew that living off the promises
of the annuities was not really living but white man named burdo could speak locota very well
and he was surprised to see someone from the northern camps among the loafers he told crazy horse
that more soldiers were coming to be posted at laryme he knew this because the whites had a way of
talking over great distances that much much faster than letters carried by stage coaches
and the pony riders they had a tapping language which by which they sent messages along a
wire faster than even the prairie falcon could fly
now what starts happening is there's there's they start a fine gold look for gold discover gold
and there's people heading north of elk river to find gold north of the shell river and these are
super intrusive right and here we go after several days travel north of shell river the
people in the gold seeking train woke a woke to an unexpected sight they were surrounded by hundreds
of mounted locota and sci-yella fighting men positioned on the hills and ridges around them
the trail north and south was blocked the blockators stayed out of rifle range and didn't
make any aggressive moves simply maintaining their positions as the day wore on a ring of men
and horses seeming to have risen out of the rocks after nightfall a ring of small fires burned
morning light revealed the blockators were still in place days and nights passed into five and then
six so these these these big train wagon train is up looking for gold and the the Indians
team up they team up and they surround them super strategic what they're doing
super strategic because they're not they're not but they're not killing all the women and children
is which is going to commit everybody to something they're just like hey and I'm sure those people
must have been horrified horrified he says here there are only two ways for the whites to go
continue north of return south if the soldiers came and tried to take gold seekers north
but locota and sci-yella what attack it was decided if they turned back south they would be
allowed to return hopefully with knowledge that powder river country would not be another trail
for the whites whatever their purpose or destination and then some soldiers come and thankfully
they turn they turn the train south and this is what I think is an important piece crazy horse
would always remember the strange episode on the snake steak to trail especially in light of
what all that was to follow he carried a lesson from it that he would use as a measure every time
he looked to the trails a fighting man all the warriors on the ridges surrounding the gold
seekers had invoked a feeling of virtue of simply coming together a feeling of strength that
comes from pursuing the same purpose several hundred had responded some from the Sahelia and perhaps
a few blue clouds married into locota families he knew several by name but most were unknown to him
on those windstrap wind swept ridges for six days however they had shared the kinship of purpose
so incredibly in person important lesson for him unifying people and working together towards a common goal
that's an opportunity yeah and and so when people feel like they're part of the group
they're capable of so much more and so that means that no matter what you do make sure
that everybody feels included on the team it's that easy I have a simple statement about this
together we are stronger and if you can keep that in mind it's it actually is like it's covered
move because with cover move you get to far apart now we can't cover move for each other together
we are stronger if you keep that in mind whenever things are happening think a together we're
stronger that's the way you want to go and that's the lesson he learned here fast forward a little
bit summer past lazily and people talked about making presence to the buffalo scouts and sending
them out looking so the so the planning for the autumn hunts could be made as the first heavy
snow's fell troubling news came from far south from the sajilia who lived along the southern fork
of the shell river soldiers it was always the soldiers 300 people had been killed at a place called
sand creek most of them sajila and some blue clouds led by black kettle and white antelope
both leaders were regarded as wise and always working for peace the killing was bad enough because
those killed were mostly women and children but the soldiers who attacked did more than kill
the white agent trusted by black kettle and white antelope had advised them to find a place to
pitch their lodges that was away from the main trails it was told there were many whites in that
part of the country many living in a large town called Denver and there was a hatred among them
for the sajila and people of the earth the camp was to fly the white banner of peace as well as
the striped banner of the long knives to signify they were peaceful but the soldiers found them
and the banners meant nothing the messengers could barely tell the story trying to keep back the
anger and the tears as well as the bile that rose in the throat for remembering women and children
were butchered after they were killed it was told parts of their bodies were cut away such as a
woman's breasts and genitalia's a child's hand or fingers and boys genitalia's
brains were bashed out with gun stocks and eyes were gouged out some babies not yet burned
born were cut from their mother's stomachs the final insult came when the soldiers attached
body parts to their blue coats and rode in a victory march through the streets of the large
town as the other whites cheered the Lakota did not want to believe the news not because they
wanted to deny the truth of it but because it was much too difficult to believe that anyone could do
such unspeakable deeds
sancryk masker um i did a podcast about that with
denyeli beleli and derral kuper we we talked about the mili masker in the sancryk masker and it's
just a freaking nightmare all the whites were not worthy enemy now and that thought was
carried with guns, lances, war clubs and bows as angry men rode out from the great camp
the Lakota swept to the northeast the sahelia to the northwest and the blue clouds swirled
like hornets in between, waystations soldier soldier posts and tra- any travelers along the
holy road or any frequented by whites were the objectives young men took addmonitions of their
elders too heart as they hardened themselves to mercy and remembered sand creek the spirit of revenge
rolled with the thunder from hooves of war horses across the frozen prairies crazy horse
joined the second attack on julesburg but the whites were reluctant to meet them face to face
in the open so there there was no fighting to speak of they left the post ablaze after taking
all they could carry from the storehouses
so they go and they're just out doing these raids and just getting after essentially right now
we're at total war and yes we are and here's the disturbing thing is those soldiers at
sand creek they were you know not connected to the soldiers that were in Montana not connected
the soldiers that he's at the fourth day and no what had happened and or maybe they knew what happened
but they I'm sure some of them said oh what the hell's going on with that just and so now you had
you have the whites that are that have been looking at all the Indians as the same I mean
I guess maybe not because they they are they are have some like the crows they work with the
crows directly but you're starting to see the two sides divide and it's you're either on this
side or that side and that's it and we're going to take vengeance on if you're white you're you're
getting attacked yeah and rightly so and that's very defender of the people then that's what
you you have to do and just turn it to a trishon warfare yeah and it's just it's not it's just escalation
and it's not going to stop so they're out doing these raids who are going in these battles
crazy horse continues to distinguish himself here's here so here's something that occurs they
had not succeeded in wiping out the soldiers because a few impetuous young men couldn't hold
themselves back for the right moment this was on an ambush and some of the young guys went hard
early and so it was a problem that had had to be corrected if they were to defeat the whites
they all agreed and one way to solve the problem was to find strong young men to lead the others
for that they said perhaps they should renew the tradition of the shirt wearers
some people scoffed at such talk no shirt wearers had been selected for a generation because the
purpose behind the tradition had been forgotten a shirt wearer was to be a young man of strong
action and good ways one to set the example for others instead the tradition had become the father
choosing his son to wear the shirt next better to let it be some said instead of dishonoring a good
thing so they they used to have hey if you were a badass you'd get this shirt but then eventually
became you know oh it's my son I'm gonna get him hook him up little hawk was growing into a daring
fighter already winning several war honors but the most perplexing and heavy change was symbolized
in the shirt made from a height of a big horn sheep now rolled in a decorated case and waiting
his parent in his parents lodge also waiting with the duties and responsibilities that came with it
the old man leaders had indeed decided to revive the old the old tradition of shirt wearers
and as expected the shirts were given to young men of important families so they do end up saying
all right we're gonna make some shirt wearers the choice of young men the choice of young man
whose enemies are afraid of his horses sword or long knife horse aka an american horse surprise no one so
that's a bunch of guys that were you know from from important families but with the name of crazy
horse was announced it was announced a gasp went through the crowd and the shouts the whoops
and the trilling that followed with the labyrinth of all he felt truly honored yet was uncertain
that he was a good choice later two more shirt wearers were chosen and he was pleased that his
friend he dog was one the other was big road a good strong and honorable man to wear shirts
you must be men above all others said an old man chosen to speak you must help others before you
think of yourselves help the widows and those who have little to wear and to eat and have no one
to help them or speak for them do not look down on others or see those who look down on you
and do not let anger guide your mind or your heart be generous be wise and show fortitude
so that the people can follow what you do and then what you say above all have courage and be the
first to charge the enemy for it is better to lie a warrior naked in death than to be wrapped up well
with the heart of water inside so that's an expanded version of what you were talking about earlier
when they talked about the we that this idea of the shortwars and again what do they talk about
I mean they opened it up with think of others before you think of yourselves that's the that's the
that's the opener you know as and essentially they're choosing their officers right yeah
and it's pretty cool because well I guess part of it they're doing it by birth because they're like
oh you're from an important family kind of like we did it and then they're like you know
where was a college degree or landowners are gonna be officers everybody else is enlisted and then
and then by actual prowess merit merit for crazy horse you know and then then you serve
others before you serve yourself and there's a tradition the Marine Corps has that's freaking awesome
and that's at the officer eats last that is is similar in that leaders eat last
that's as it should be you know as it should be fast forward a little bit calling the young
men together high backbone scolded them for causing the ambush to fail this is after they
obviously just failed on an ambush the young men listened without protests as he reminded them
that fighting the whites was not a war for glory but a war for survival you reminded them of
sand creek when he finished there was a loud affirmation but an even louder one came after
he announced his plan for another ambush most of the fighting men would hide themselves and their
horses in the ridges and gullies on either side of the wagon trail from prairie dog Greek to
lodge trail ridge a small group would attack the wood gathers who always went out from the fort by
wagon in the morning when the soldiers came out to drive the attackers away 10 decoys would show
themselves and lead them toward lodge trail ridge and then north down us down to a slope ending
in a meadow before prairie dog creek when the signal was given the hiding warriors were attacked
and not before or and not before or the ambush would be spoiled the soldiers had to believe that
only 10 doig decoys were fighting them most important to the plan were the decoys if they failed
several hundred fighting men would be denied the opportunity for victory therefore the decoys needed
a strong leader one skilled in warfare with proven judgment in battle the leader of the decoys
would be crazy horse the cries and shelter affirmation rang through camp and fighting man
young and old crowded around to put their names in as one of the other nine
they do some preparation then the attack came well away from the fort but still within sight
so the Lakota could be sea surrounding the wax could be seen surrounding the wagon so these
are the decoys going in action after initial charge the attackers kept the wagon men and escort
riders engaged the gunfire sounded especially sharp in the frigid mountain air soon the western
gates swung open a column of mounted and walking soldiers appeared the Lakota attackers kept up
the firing making sure the rescue column was well out of the fort as the soldiers passed their
thicket crazy horse and his decoys charged so this is like going as perfect to plan as it could go
fortunately enough of the decoys fortunately enough of the decoys had a few bullets that they could
fire several shots to make it seem like an all-out attack crazy horse shot a few arrows when he
was close enough to see the hairy faces of some of the soldiers for some moments the soldiers
seemed confused then they finally opened fire uneven snow covered the cover over the frozen ground
and dangerously frigid air with the decoys decore warriors first obstacles and bullets humming
past them like angry bees reminded them that they had a daunting task ahead and a long way to
finish it the first few mounted soldiers turned off the trail to pursue them and the rest of the
column fell and slowly behind them fainting head on charges the decoys would swerve at the last moment
well within range of the soldier guns they took the soldier north the soldiers north over the
frozen snow fields at one point some of the decoys including crazy horse had to ride down a
treacherously steep frozen slope the soldiers took the gentler slope of the south face and kept
pursuing an open valley with thick stand of trees on either side of the creek lay ahead with no
serious obstacles to impede the soldier's advance once across the creek the warriors turned straight
north and came inside of large trail ridge the walking soldiers were slowing down the column
crazy horse dismounted well within rifle range pulled out a knife and calmly scraped the ice
from the bottom of his horses hooves when bullets began to ricochet closer and closer he
remounted and loped away the other decoys to infuriate the soldiers used similar tactics fast forward a
little bit on the ridge i think i want to say i read that this was about a multi mile like a
five mile trail they had to make a move five miles they had to get pursued for five miles on the ridge
the soldiers hesitated perhaps waiting for some to catch up the decoys renewed their efforts
coaxing their tired horses part way up the slope moving dangerously close one pretended to be
shot off his horse and immediately bounced up running behind the horse before skillfully
remounting from the back crazy horse had picked the right men for the task at hand for crazy horse
and the decoys this was the decisive moment if the waiting ambushers attacked prematurely
soldiers could still escape the decoys looked left and right as they proceeded north along a very
narrow part of the ridge but could see no movement below the slope of the ridge falling away before
them was the winding prairie dog creek and the end of their task now the soldiers were pressing
harder increasing their gunfire obviously certain that the decoys comprised the entire enemy force
crazy horse formed his men into a skirmish line and those with bullets had sp- with bullets to
spare fired at the oncoming soldiers drawing into a heavy drawing in heavy return fire
the decoys raced their horses down the slippery slope forming two lines as they rode they
crossed the flats to prairie dog creek east line of riders swinging out wide and then crossing
each other on the opposite side of the creek this was the signal to attack from out of the very
earth itself came the awaiting ambushers horses and men burst from the gullies cutbacks and what
little winter shrubbery was there in a heartbeat several hundred fighting men rose road south
some from the east and some from the west those closest to lodge trail ridge quickly shut the
soldiers escape route back to the fort the soldiers advanced stopped then they instinctively began to
fight their to fight to reach the safety of the fort the walking soldiers were shrung out to the back
closer to lodge trail ridge they were the first to fall as gunfire blasted up the slopes below
them there was no end of the guns firing the soldiers fought hard as they retreated up the ridge
but there was nothing to be gained they were cut off with nowhere to go wave after wave of
the mounted warriors fought their way up the treacherous slopes those with guns used up their bullets
and then resorted to their bows some had only bows and arrows arrows flew up from the east slope
and from the west the sky was dark with them and some found their mark in the body of a Lakota
or Sahila toward the end the warriors waited in among the dead and dying soldiers killing
them with a pistol shot or a hard skillful swing of a war club or the deadly thrust of a lance
and then always quiet all the soldiers were dead
it began with the Sahilia as they remembered sand creek and what had been done to their
relatives when the frenzy ended the soldiers were stripped naked fingers were chopped off
belly slashed open eyes gouged out many warriors were wounded but fewer than 15 had been killed
kind of a kind of a perfect operation really I mean it sounds us like a textbook operation
and those soldiers got lored out I think they're ended up being 80 of them
and they were all killed and then mutilated
fast forward a little bit snow came and winter passed a loafer brought word from the peace
talkers they had come with more presence kettles blankets knives and now guns and they were
asking for red cloud to come and sign the papers that all the Lakota could share in these gifts
so there could be peace in the power powder river counter the peace talkers had come with a new
offer as well all the country from the great muddy river to the shining mountains would be
Lakota land so long as the rivers shall flow and the grass grows where the whites
where did the whites get the power to give the Lakota lands they already controlled crazy horse
heard many old men ask crazy horse horse road north raid the crow's he returned with new horses
and to news that his uncle spotted tail had his own lands to live on given him to him by the whites
agency it was called crazy horse pondered this news even as red cloud road south to fort letter me
with a new power of his own he made a mark next to his name on the white man's piece of paper
and that was the fort letter me treaty of 1868
it's you know if you can get some people compromise and you can make some people and win some
people over you can divide people yeah right there's there's just done yeah there's a funny discussion
in there where they're like how how is red cloud sign the way our land yeah oh he is well hey
I'm gonna sign away my brother and laws lodging yeah yeah there it doesn't make sense to them right
doesn't it's just again it's like hey Jason I'll give you money for your for your air you go well
okay what about put do you want to buy echoes there too I can sign for echoes there yeah I'll buy that too
or you know I look at that one's air he got your air you know Jason sold it to me you're like what what just happened
you know but at the end of the day those guys whatever their motivations were
they kind of saw the writing on the wall and they got on the winning side and so they were trying to
carve themselves out even though you know they're maybe they're they're betrayers or they are betraying
the other locato but um it's that change thing again yeah likes it yeah you sometimes got to
change that horse you know returning from a hunt crazy horse stopped in the camp of no water to rest
since the great gathering below elk mountain two years past he had spoken to black buffalo
woman several times whatever had been between them and long past she was the mother of three now
and seemed entirely proper for him to ask about her children but each time they talked they lingered
longer something that did not go unnoticed by someone who knew what had happened before so now
black black buffalo woman waited discreetly for the gift of elk teeth crazy horse had lately been
leaving for her with someone but as he was preparing to leave she approached openly and brought him food
and they stood together talking he left not lingering too long but as he rode away some notice
that she watched until he was out of sight warm spoke and there's there's some
some talk about what was going to happen with black buffalo woman there's obviously a
rekindling of this thing of this relationship of this this uh this love at first sight that they had
had warm spoke nonetheless because much wrote on the shoulders of his son much that was important
to the people they will not let her go he said quietly fast forward a little bit one morning
after victory dances whispers flew through camp black buffalo woman had left her children with
relatives and rode out beside the light-haired one no two people could agree over this new turn
some said it was a coming for a long time since her father had made the choice of a husband for
her when her heart belonged to the shy quiet young man who is now the most powerful warrior among them
others said there would be trouble though she was a good Lakota woman free to choose her husband
was not one to let her have that choice besides the reasons her father and uncle had influenced her
choice of a husband were even more important now some said cautiously and they were right
the couple and their friends came to a small camp in a narrow little valley and there they rested
little shield he dogs brother and little big man were among were along and made a feast as night
fell there came a commotion and a man torn into the lodge where crazy horse and black buffalo
woman were guests a man worn from a hard trail and driven by anger of a jealous heart
no water stood above them a pistol in hand as crazy horse leap to his feet
the pistol boomed
so got a little love triangle going on no water's not happy and maybe I didn't cover it but
the tradition was if the woman wanted a divorce she could do that he was up to her and and the
man was supposed to respect it but everyone kind of knew that no water was not the kind of guy
that was going to let this slide it appears that there's like there's a lot of politics involved
with this marriage and it was an arranged marriage which is kind of outside the norm too
yeah incredibly tragic story so
luckily enough back to the book he awoken in a lodge unfamiliar to him but knew the strong old face that
appeared as his eye cleared and he could see one I was still swollen along with the left side of his
face old spotted crow his uncle the brother of long face not a degrading and held him down
as he tried to sit up she is back with her people the old man said and answered the question
on his face my cousin bad heart bull made it so no one will harm her he'd been in and out of sleep
for three days he was told the swelling on his face had gone down a little but he would have a
scar where the bullet had opened his face from the corner of his nose down to the jaw line
there will be black powder in the scar from the pistol warm had indicated
to very fine horses were tied outside his uncle's lodge sent by no water as a gesture of peace
take them his father advised to soften the anger of those who would take revenge in your name
so he did and the young men who wanted no water turned over to them set aside their anger
and put away their bows and guns then one night the young men who had gone into snake
country with little hawks slipped back into camp sorry I'm fast forward a little bit
the raiding so before we go there he he humbles himself basically he humbles himself the guy
comes to kill him shoot him in the face he happens to live and instead of starting a freaking war
he says all right you know what I accept the horses there's just for some forgiveness and acceptance
and everybody can move on yep so fast forward a little bit now then one night the young man
who had gone into snake country with little hawks slipped back into camp the raiding against the
snakes did not go well on the way home little hawk was killed by whites in an unexpected attack
the news was like a war club to the stomach as his mother's began to weep softly crazy horse
went out to stand alone in the night his brother had been killed while he had been chasing after
his own selfish needs so I don't I don't probably failed to make that clear but little hawk
we've mentioned a few times was his was crazy horses little brother and so while crazy horses
going through this drama and injury and recovery they go out on the raid and his little brother
out with I think is out with him out without his older brother for the first time dies
the next day he saw no water unloading meat at the lodge of a relative
seeming to sense crazy horses anger no water jump on his horse and galloped out of camp
perhaps unable to contain his anguish over both the loss of the only woman he wanted and the death of
his brother crazy horse grabbed the nearest horse and gave chase across broken land he kept up the
chase until no water plunged his horse into the elk river and escaped on the other side
not many days after that the council of old old men met influenced by the relatives of red cloud
and no water crazy horse was to return the shirt they decided his actions over the woman
endangered the peace of the ogala and no one outside like no one like no outside enemy could
and this could not be overlooked though there was anger in his own lodge and from the young men
at this trickery crazy horse gave back the shirt soon after that the lodge of no water moved
far south to another camp and whispers were made behind the hand that red cloud was to be given the
shirt this is like you said there's just a trajectory that that gains get to gaining speed you know you
lose you know you then I'll use your woman now you lose your brother now you learn to lose your
placement with the shirt as a shirt where and the friction points are you know him and red cloud
and so what is he doing he's still fighting and who's he fighting on
I guess unfortunately he's fighting snakes he's fighting other other Indian tribes
going to this section here they attack but the snakes were too many the two Lakota groups were
too far apart to regroup and the mud was too deep their horses tired somehow they managed to hold back
the determined counter attack crazy horse high backbone and good weasel with their rifles
were rear guard as others retreated first one fell back then another managing to keep the snakes
at bay but several snakes on fresh horses suddenly were able to surround high backbone
and crazy horse saw his old friend take a bullet in the chest still the old warrior pulled
out as pistol and emptied it at the on rushing enemy until they overran him crazy horse ran
into rescue him but his horse was too tired from pulling himself out of the mud and the enemy fire
was too much good weasel finally intervened grabbing the rain to his horse the rain turned into snow as
they rode road toward home sometime in the night they found a sheltered place and built a warming fire
with with their horses while their horses rested crazy horse sat huddled beneath his robe
alone with the thoughts of his old friend and teacher
so I mean it's just it's just a downward spiral at this point
they get back to camp crazy horse smoked his pipe and pondered all that had happened since
he and he dog had carried their lances against the crow much had been taken away it seemed first
black buffalo woman then his place is a shirt wear now his younger brother and his oldest friend were gone
he took little comfort in knowing they had died on the path they they had chosen
there was only emptiness where they had been perhaps these things had come to pass because he had
not fully honored the calling to be a thunder dreamer though he had learned the importance of honoring
the old ways from his fathers and from his father and uncles and his mothers he was not one for
ceremonies or standing in front of the people but if he must live the life of sacrifice he would as
a thunder dreamer he did not belong to himself he belonged to the people it was not what he wanted
for his life but it was what life wanted from him as going forward a little bit this sort of
collaboration with the whites continues and it continues to escalate and finally at some point
crazy horse returned home to resurgent rumors that minors were going into the black hills in
violation of the rules set down in the horse creek treaty gold was the reason I yes gold the white
man's god the whites were willing to risk their own lives to get gold gold was the reason for
their interest in the black hills the heart of everything that was to the Lakota
so they got the sacred the sacred black hills and the whites want to get gold this is
this is going breaking away from the story for a second and going into one of the reflections
sections from from marshal in this point most boys therefore basically learn the same lessons
and we're given the same opportunities to perform as fighting men so how does a crazy horse emerge
from a broad cultural blueprint and set himself apart perhaps he is testimony to the premise
that some things cannot be taught perhaps there is something innate that some have and others don't
men and women who coach young athletes point out that while skill and methodology can be taught to
any athlete the physical attributes of speed and quickness are frequently the difference between a
good athlete and an outstanding one many people dream of becoming leaders while others
shun the opportunity even when it falls into their laps general George Pat and a World War II
fame certainly sought the responsibilities of leadership and reveled in its rewards and prestige
when he was successful crazy horse on the other hand was not as quick to grab the opportunity when it
came and literally had no desire to talk about his exploits but both were exceptional leaders
and their accomplishments could not have been achieved without a certain amount of basic ability
as well as the experience of winning and losing what is less obvious is that both of them also
had inherent characteristics only a few of us have those characteristics enabled them to perform
daring and reckless deeds and make bold decisions and to inspire others to follow them
what those characteristics are by name or label is often difficult to identify but the consequences
they enable are not difficult to see. guys had some attributes you know and that question comes
up a lot for our leaders born or made and I always my answer which I wrote about leadership strategy
tactics is you're gonna have some strengths and weaknesses all of us are are you gonna be lucky
enough to have you know the full of the full catalog of great leadership assets chances are
about zero. could you be a George Patton that you know has your articulate and your smart
and your calm and you you have control of your most you can read people like all those things
I guess but it's gonna be very rare we're gonna have strength and weaknesses and
and occasionally some people are gonna get that level of charisma and an influence over other people
um that's gonna come from a place maybe not maybe you can't teach that there's parts of
leadership that you can absolutely teach there's parts of even you know the way you care yourself
that you can improve but what we what we always teach people is you got to build a team of leaders
that help you with the your areas of weakness so if there's something you're not maybe not that great
at find someone on your team that is boy and if you want to find step on to success hey start
treating everybody with respect and and and like they said with their leaders their their
their deal is your job is to teach is to take care of the people and then people will do
almost anything for you um yeah I'm gonna do it. Just one of the lessons that you just you could
take away from this and and see that like crazy horses doing all these things but he's not really
bragging about it but everybody sees it and everyone else is talking about it which makes it seem even
greater yeah and then you know when he comes back from a raid the first thing he does he's like
I got all these horses let me go give them to the widows and let me divide up all this stuff and
give it and take care of take care of which is a job. Yeah put others before yourself step one.
Go back the book black buffalo woman Red Cloud's niece was the love of his life politics
however influenced her choice for a husband she married no water only because he was of an influential
family and their union enabled a broader influence in a stronger political base crazy horse was of
course heartbroken in time the wound would heal but as it's often the case a true love has never
completely forgotten a few years later when the opportunity arose black buffalo woman followed
her heart and left her husband the coat of women can make a choice because societal norms allowed it
but in her case a jealous husband did not and this did to him just kind of debriefing this crazy horse
to put himself in harm's way many times as a fighting man but he probably never came as close to
dying as he did when no water showed up with the borrowed pistol and shot him in the face
it was no water's intention to kill crazy horse and he thought he did the subsequent fewer
brought several factions on the brink of blood shed on one side someone to defend no water and
on the other someone to revenge crazy horse to prevent any violence crazy horse gave up the love of
his life for a second time those who were jealous of him were quick to influence the old men
leaders to strip them of the position of shirt wearer crazy horse willingly gave up the shirt
but the status he had achieved circumvented the loss of influence many people though not totally
overlooking his mistakes till regard him as a strong leader and remain loyal to him it was a
lesson not lost on him never again did he put his own desires above the needs of the people that
was yet another example for others to follow true leadership is rarely the consequence of election
appointment dictatorship or inheritance good leadership overall is much too critical to be left to
elected politicians monarchs managers administrators supervisors and directors having a
authority does not make anyone a leader true leadership is exercised when someone performs a
necessary or critical task and accomplishes an objective thereby setting an example
most of us will never face the daunting task of leading men and women in the combat
but we will likely have an opportunity to set an example we may not carry titles such as
president governor mayor general or even chief but we can be leaders simply by demonstrating
that effort can be made tasks can be accomplished
yeah you know it's interesting you look at a seal puttor and there's gonna be between one and five
leaders in there hopefully there might be zero but that's chances are very small of that
there's gonna be one to five and they might be anyone of the puttor and you can just see
and if they're well balanced you know like there's some young guy or you know one cruise wonder
that's just has good natural leadership ability smart has he going check and he can make things
happen and it doesn't matter that he's not the chief it doesn't matter he's not the lieutenant
and as long as the chief and lieutenant humble enough guy hey he's a good leader hey you want to run
this thing it's gonna be fine occasionally those guys get mad they get scared they get intimidated
they don't want someone running things they think they should be and yeah I've seen it where
you get like a new guy in a puttor and any isn't necessarily calling any shots but because his
demeanor he's like got a good demeanor he's never bummed out it's like yeah everything's really
terrible and it's like yeah this whatever and you'll watch that like his his influence because
he's got a good attitude even in a worse situation will bleed over to the rest of the puttor
and so guys are kicking rocks and saying this where you this is done that that that that that
great attitude is is contagious so that leadership kind of by example even when they're not really
influenced people what to do they're influencing the overall effectiveness of the unit by
bringing it's morale of the race the morale that's freaking priceless priceless the hits just keep on
coming um crazy horse who who at now as a different wife he he he he has a daughter with she dies
death was not new to him men died and battle sometimes and he was not surprised by that they were gone
or at that or the way that they had died as fighting men but the bundle atop is scaffold was
harder reality it was a reality that challenged the goodness in life he fell across it and wept
uncontrollably days passed there was thunder some wind and a little rain when he could no longer stay
awake he slept beneath the scaffold curled up on her robe he ignored hunger and thirst warm
had told him a kind of coughing sickness unknown before the whites came had taken her though he had
tried he could find no medicine to help her finally when no more tears would come crazy horse took his
leave the news that awaited him fanned his anger even more soldiers had gone into the black hills
a large contingent according to the sketchy reports from the few from a few Lakota who had
the misfortune of being in the wrong place the wrong time a group friendly to the whites
had been watching the column of wagons and the soldiers when they when they were attacked one
Lakota was killed another wounded they somehow managed to escape to tell their story so now you're
you know you're blaming the death of your daughter on the whites as well and now they're going into
your holy land yeah so now they go out and start just basically killing whites where they can
find them the most vulnerable at this time is the minors people that are out in these little mining
camps and so they start initiating more of a more of a guerrilla warfare and this is something that
you know knowing what we know now about insurgency's that would have been the call because they
couldn't get people to unite but that fighting like an insurgent war would have been the well
would have been another possibility and that's what he kind of end up doing here he says the
tactics crazy horse and his companions were simple yet effective after observing isolated minors
camps to determine their numbers and weapons they position themselves and swept in if the terrain
was rough was rough and offered good cover they sneaked in close on foot before they attacked
in open areas with little cover they charged in on horses that's kind of crazy because that's exactly
what we would do like if we had if we could sneak into a target on foot we do that if we couldn't
we just tried the vehicles right up to the target and that's what the exact same thing they would do
massive explosive breach lots of nowhere common in in either situation they use their
lances and war clubs and the silent bow quite effectively rarely did any minor react quickly enough
to fire a gun which worked in the Lakota's favor without gunshots to warn anyone else in the
area the minors in the next valley or watershed remained oblivious and thus vulnerable to attack
he says this it was necessary to attack the minors and kill them they were trespassers and thieves
not honorable enemies the tactics they used were the only way to fight them especially in the
black hills strike hard and fast and flicked and inflict as much chaos and as many casualties
as possible and then withdraw swiftly that kind of fighting could play to the Lakota's strengths
and skills as fighters good at close combat crazy horse spoke these thoughts to his companions
as they rode home and they listened and agreed they'd seen firsthand what could be done if enough
Lakota fighting men could be persuaded to fight in the same way and if enough bullets and powder
could be obtained the whites could be driven away yeah I mean that's the only strategy they got
because they the minors have got all these things they need they got guns and they got bullets
they're not getting those from anybody else and so they just sneak in pick them up sneak in pick them
meanwhile red cloud it was learned who's making the trip to persuade the powers and
Washington to remove the little agent from his agency when all is said and done it didn't matter
who the agent was on spotted tail agency or on the red cloud agency as long as there was an
agent and the Lakota accepted it and newbies the whites were in control but when red cloud and the
others returned and there were many supposed headmen who made the trip the news they brought back
in sensed the wild Lakota and you made this distinction I haven't pulled it out yet but there's
basically the the ones that are living in the agencies and then there's the Lakota that are wild
that are still living in the traditional way to the best of their ability and I say the best
of the ability because they relied heavily on buffalo and the buffalo were being wiped out and so
this makes living in their traditional way much more difficult in some cases probably impossible
the great father wanted to buy the black hills sell the heart of everything that is sell the
dust of the ancestors not looking not there's there's Lakota that we're just we're not doing it
the day now there's more politics takes place and eventually they're supposed to all come and
report the day when all Lakota had to report to the agencies it coming gone the northern camps were nervous
watching the horizons for the first sign of soldiers that they had heard had been gathering at
Fort Fetterman when it relaxed its grip and a span of warm days it melted the snow and
followed the ice on the creeks and rivers he dog took advantage of the opportunity to head for the agency
his contingent of eight Lakota families were mostly women and children in no condition
outrun mounted soldiers before he left crazy horse had ridden up into the hills unable to watch
his closest friend give into the agency though he understood all too painfully he dogs reasons
the spaces vacated by eight lodges were not as big as the holes left in the hearts of the
relatives who watched their loved ones riding away slowly and uncertainly looking back frequently
I mean you know the guys got a bunch of women and kids and the he knows he's gonna do so much and
sitting bull sent out his carefully chosen messages to announce that the people should gather near
chalk butts in late spring and treating them to speak wisely and clearly to the leaders among
the Lakota as well as the Dakota and Nakota he wanted his messages to appeal to their sense of
pride especially to those who are surely disenchanted with life on the agencies so sitting bulls
another wild one of the Indians and he's very I mean obviously we've all heard of sitting bull
and so he has incredible amount of influence and he's starting to try and gather people up and
unite them a little bit so that starts to take place more and more people arrived almost every
day the horse herb was growing and eating down the sparse grass around the butts some of the men
said perhaps there was many as 7,000 head sitting bulls already at work inviting the older leaders
to his lodge he was an impressive and charismatic man a slight limp from a gunshot wound to his
hip during his days a young fighting man served only to give him more credibility he had earned nearly
70 battle honors more than any man at the gathering except crazy horse now past the age of 50 he had
a solid reputation as a wise leader and counselor enhanced by his status as a medicine man he was
immensely pleased at the response to his message and announced he would conduct a Sundance
spiritually as well as psychologically it was the right thing at the right time it could only
serve to unify the people and add to the feelings of strength and pride that seemed to be growing
as quickly as the horse herd it was that kind of insight that made him an influential leader
the camp movement moved west across the powder and the tongue into the valley of the rose bud
and across it as well turning at the northern slopes of the wolf mountains into the broken
country near the greasy grass river while sitting bull was hard at work for the hearts and minds
the people crazy horse scouts and all directions feeling among the military leaders was that the
biggest threat laid to lay to the south from three stars army and this book does not have a
ton of detail about the battle at rose bud or really the battle at little big horn
those are detailed pretty well in the book I fought with custard and also in the book wooden leg
um but there is sort of a debriefing here on some of the things that went that went down
going to the book the rose bug bud fight as the battle came to be known was the toughest combat
crazy horse had seen the battle of hundred and hand ten years earlier that was when they
surrounded those soldiers and killed the bird the battle of the hundred in the hand ten years earlier
had had its own set of circumstances that made it tough but at the rose bud
Lakota the Lakota faced a larger and more heavily armed enemy force three stars soldiers were both
infantry and cavalry forcing Lakota to adjust to different tactics as the fighting progressed attack
was met with counter attack as the day war on the valley of the rose bud funded with gunfire and dust
hung in the air laid in the afternoon who is evident that the soldiers were disorganized fighting
and scattered units their effectiveness significantly reduced crazy horse was notified even though
nearly a hundred had arrived at mid-morning the Lakota and sahila were critically low on ammunition
sensing that three stars wouldn't be able to mount any pursuit crazy horse sent the word to withdraw
crazy horse rode with he dog big road and good weasel among others as they once again
chased dusk into night there was no pursuit from the soldiers to speak of the feverish after
math of combat slowly faded as the reality of the day began to take hold ten good men in
been killed and many wounded in a day or two the the scouts crazy horse had left behind would report
on the soldiers so that's the first big battle that they engage is that battle at rose bud
and then six days had passed since the rose bud fight victory dance is still went
far into the night and the fighting men were asked to tell the stories of their involvement
the mood of the encampment had changed from initial uncertainty to one of comfortable
sense of strength hardly anyone no matter how old could remember the Lakota ever see gathering
in such numbers for any purpose at midday sitting bull sent cryers to announce the move
to the greasy grass valley and by mid afternoon the first lodges were taken down and the
families began moving by sundown most of the encampment was gone except for a few lodges
and the sun dance arbor fast forward up a little bit more there in their kind of camp now
and we'll go to the book the sides of the council lodging and rolled up to allow cross
ventilation a few men were waiting in anticipation meeting with sitting bull women had already
brought food sitting bull had been busy through most of the night attending to a gravely ill woman
he arrived at the council lodged just as a slight den of commotion came from the south end of the
encampment where he had just been a lone Lakota rider splashed across the greasy grass
filled bank to bank with the heavy spring runoff from the mountain snows gaining the west bank
he began to shout prepare yourselves the soldiers are coming the soldiers are coming
and this is when we get into the little big horn battle
the soldiers across the river far to the south near the mouth vash creek can try to gallop
tried galloping their horses across the long open flood plain toward the south end of the encampment
they had been quickly driven back and then chased across the river many were killed at the water
crossing after heavy fighting in some trees near the river as far as crazy horse and the other
leaders were concerned that was the first fight gall of the hunk papa and ol and ogala battle
leaders black moon and big road were among those who had courageously led 200 fighting men in that action
the second fight started at medicine tail kooley more soldiers had tried to cross into the
encampment from the north end but were stopped by a small determined group of boys and old men
armed mostly with old single shot rifles by then many of the women children old people were
fleeing to the northwest somehow worded reached crazy horse and gall of the second attempted
incursion gall immediately disengaged from the first fight and let a hundred men to medicine tail
and crossed the soldiers galloped away up a long slope to the north crazy horse at hurried to
to his lodge and found black shawl that's his wife waiting with his second war horse
the camp was in total confusion not only were women and children running away to safety
men were galloping through to hurried to the second fight shouts and screams filled the air
gunshots could be heard to the south and now thinly to the north he took a second war horse
and gall there is many men as to him as he could if a second group of soldiers was heading
north they could be circling to attack from another direction it made sense to try and flank
them so he led the men who were with him to an old crossing guessing the soldiers would stay on
the high ground he had crossed the river and raised to meet them if they came off the end of the
high north south ridge where he knew they laid to the east on the slopes across the river they
circled to the east and encountered 20 or so soldiers whom they chased back to the main body
the gunfire never stopped he heard it as they crossed the river a continuous sound rather like
someone tearing canvas gall and his men crazy horse heard later stayed in pursuit of the running
soldiers even though they did not gain a ridge at first the soldiers were organized even managing
to dismount and form skirmish lines to fire at the oncoming Lakota but galls relentless pursuit
broke their lines and after that they were running away and their fire was no longer effective
crazy horse led a charge when the soldiers tried to push north off their ridge by then gunfire
was thinning it was sporadic and then there were silence the second fight was over as he rode
through the dust and he could see how it had unfolded dead horses and dead soldiers were
strewn along the path they had taken what's what's different about a little big horn battle
field then then get his bird is because the scale of it's much smaller they actually they have
markers for where these soldiers were dying and they went back and they could find all the
scourge lines and everything so you can see it in real you know laid out where bodies fell
became up from the river then across and then just the disaster that happened I mean you
couldn't all the the way it's laid out and the bodies are laid out you can see that the guys are
just try the last couple guys were just trying to get away and getting mold mean while the guys
down at the other position they're surrounded up on that hill they're waiting for their turn
they're wondering where cus custer splits forces all these times and there and they're wondering
where did he go did he leave us and some guys kind of push out and they can see
this big swirling thing and they can see the Lakota shooting down the ground they're like oh no
he's done and then they wind up getting their under siege yeah looking forward to walking that
battlefield myself going back to the story here after that the you know sitting bulls trying to keep
people there but they they kind of start to like it's the fighting's over and kind of people
got stuff to do right well there's another element coming toward him too and they're like hey we
got to move everybody yeah yeah and I'm even going past that so that happens um and eventually
he says this what was left of the largest gathering ever of Lakota separated in several encampments
moving along the eastern foothills of the shining mountain soon after the departure from Greece
he grasped small groups began breaking away to head for the agencies sitting bull like crazy horse
was deeply disappointed because they were losing the strength of numbers despite the best efforts
of sitting bull the people scattered some made excuses saying it was time to hunt and make meat for
the coming winter which was more difficult now because of the scarcity of buffalo others on a
bashly headed for the agencies sitting bull finally headed north to more familiar territory crazy
horse took his people east to the black hills finding a sheltered valley northwest of the mountains
to hide the camps from there he led raids into the black hills there that continues for a while
and this is all he does a great job in the book of just this kind of torment and anguish that
that crazy horse is going through as as he sees what's happening at some point dull knife
another one of his friends informed crazy horse that he was forced to consider living giving in
to life on the agency if it meant his people would be safe from facing continual conflict with the
long knives the idea was debated long and frequently strangely an opportunity presented itself
when messengers arrived bringing word to from three stars who had been given assurance that the
wild Lakota would be allowed to select the location for their own agencies if they signed a piece
agreement the only drawback was that included an agreement to sell to the sale of the black hills
and spite of deep seated suspicions crazy horse agreed that this important issue should be
discussed face to face with the long knives crazy horse and a law large detachment of warriors
escorted the delegation north to the fort on the elk river a group of crow scouts met the
emissaries just outside the walls of the fort making friendly gestures to indicate their peacefulness
as the eight Lakota road past them toward the gate weapons were drawn suddenly and the crow open
fire at point blank range on the unarmed Lakota and then fled on horseback crazy horse charged
down from the bluff but stopped when mounted soldiers emerge emerge from the fort instinctively
the Lakota emissaries turn their horses and gallop for the safety of the bluffs and protection
of the escort warriors only three rejoined the warriors five laid dead on the ground near the gates in
the fort so the chance for peace in the crow just gets gets like completely fumble fumble and um
yeah you know the crow had motivations to do with the dead and you know the
I think the guy's come out of the thing they're trying to hunt him down because they realize
oh dang it yep this is um the fast forward a little bit more the harsh winner should have been
to turn at least providing a brief respite from worrying about the long knives but that was not
to be to agency Lakota carrying a bold message from bear coat found the crazy horse camp
if the wild Lakota moved into the agencies they would be given food but would have to give up
their weapons and horses sword graciously has ever assured crazy horses people that it was his
idea to intervene because he didn't want his friends and relatives dying when peace in a good
life could be had so easily if crazy horse would come in meaning surrender his people would be given
food clothing and blankets and then he would be allowed to return to powder river area to claim
it as his agency so like oh you want we'll give you peace we'll give you food you can have your own
area only he and sitting bowl were stubborn or perhaps foolish how could anyone continue
resisting when even a brief battle used up the bullets that took several days of scrounging
half the people who followed him wanted to go into the agency they were tired of running from the
soldiers tired of being hungry tired of seeing relatives die they stayed because they believed he
had an answer of some kind something that would solve the problem of the soldiers
yeah you can it's just closing in and there's really not much of an option yeah these essentially
your glaciers glacier yeah forces just just towards him and he's gonna get crushed and squeeze in one direction
so they end up going to camp Robinson fast forward a little bit here nearly four months at
past since crazy horse people had arrived at camp Robinson 900 and all with over 1500 horses the soldiers
had taken their horses first and then their guns and then their hope and four months the promise
of an agency of their own in the north that turned into an impossible dream he blamed himself
partly because he could do nothing perhaps if he had learned to be an agency Lakota and put on
the defeated smile and the presence of three stars and other soldier leaders none of this would
be happening but the soldiers were not the only ones to cause the turmoil of the past four months
the finger of blame could be pointed at many Lakota as well in fact they were mostly to blame
the white agents and the army officers found the flames of jealousy and let little minds that could
not think beyond the moment and little men who yearned for recognition and power do the rest there was
no other way to look at it in the end the Lakota defeated themselves they had the whites outnumbered
an outman and did nothing the entire garrison could have been overrun by the by enough determined
Lakota fighting men with a good plan if they truly wanted to return to living the old way
and control of their lands and their lives instead men stepped over each other to betray their own
relatives in order to obtain the power handed out by the whites a power they couldn't get on their own
and he details some of this just ego drama that's going on and they have the opportunity you know
if I'm if I'm in camp and you know Jason crazy horse Jason's out there still being a wild
Lakota and I want more power in the camp maybe I say you know you don't want to you don't want to
deal with that Jason crazy or he's too crazy out there you don't want to put him in a power position
you don't want to get like all these things this happens a buffalo hunt had been promised
but there'd been no hunt and crazy horse understood why first someone with more power than three
stars had to say that the Lakota could go chasing buffalo if given the opportunity three stars
reason the hunters would keep going perhaps all the way to grand mother's land to join sitting
both which is Canada by the way adding to that some among the Lakota complain to three stars that
if crazy horse and his young man were allowed to hump buffalo then everyone must be allowed
and it was a Lakota who warned that it was dangerous to put guns in the hands of crazy horse
so he's just getting stabbed in the back by you know as is dream pointed out by some of his own people
after many of the soldier leaders at camp Robinson came to crazy horse with horse with questions
about the greasy grass fight and the defeat of the long hair which is cluster two agency chief
sent messages complaining to three star perhaps there was no place for another agency chief
crazy horse thought to reassure his uncle red cloud that he had no wish to be made a chief of any kind
but he knew anything he had to say to them would not be regarded as truth but eventually the
rumors did fly it was said three star would make crazy horse chief over everyone including
spotted tail and red clouds you can see this is just like political drama to make mark matters
worse many of the lesser soldier leaders with himself saying that crazy horse could influence the
younger men better than the two older leaders could through it all he had tried to talk to three
stars about the promise of a northern agency day after day traveling to Robinson from cottonwood
creek if you want your agency some of crazy horse's friend said carefully in low voices
for it was hard to know who might be listening you will have to travel to their place at
power where the great father lives and speak to him face to face of course they warned
if three star sends you ahead of red cloud or spotted tail they will find a way to make it
difficult for us while you're gone they will find a way to take you down when you return
crazy horse had no wish to travel to the great father and curry favor from a man he didn't know
you'd be out of place and only something for show someone to perform for the powerful crazy
horse did not wish to be a thing of curiosity fast forward a little bit more and now he's
trying to make a deal man he's trying to like get it done he knows what what where these things are
going he's late in the game but he's trying to make it happen yeah I mean he's got it he's got to
think about the women in the children at this point and he's like well you know I could keep fighting
but then who's going to protect them and that's where this is where the guys is so honorable
because he just he knows where his responsibility is it's not like how many soldiers I can kill
because he can kill quite a few more and he can probably you know inspire a bunch of the young
men on the thing to to to rise up but to what end and at the end of the the day it's the women and
children they're going to suffer so then he's like I gotta try and fix this and negotiate the best
deal that he can at that point so he starts to put to deal together
lieutenant Lee the soldier leader in charge at spotted tails agency sent word that crazy horse must
come to the soldier house crazy horse rode out with touch the clouds and white thunder spotted
tail and over a hundred of his young men met them on the trail Lee arrived with black crow and
Louis Bordeaux and was frightened seeing that he was between the minicondue and the aglala
on one side and spotted tails on the other there were shouts and threats hurled back and forth
and weapons brandished until crazy horse raised a hand in silence slowly fell over the
gathering Lee now very frightened told crazy horse that he must return to Robinson and make it
good with the soldier leaders there so the night past the morning came when the sun arose he
hurried to the soldier house to speak to lieutenant Lee to assure him that he had not changed his mind
there's ready to speak with Randall he was one of the leaders to make things good so with touch the
clouds swift bear and black crow along they started out for camp Robinson the first group of blue
coded Lakota men met them along the trail they said nothing informed a wide half circle around crazy
horse and the others further on more blue coded Lakota arrived and now they became a mob of more than
60 it was then that crazy horse knew he was in trouble so now you have Lakota's that are wearing the the
military the American military jacket fast thunder was lost in the crowd so tour he
dog and touch the clouds all around was noise of running and scuffling as if men were pushing
together crazy horse was pushed toward a square house made of logs a strange place for Randall the
Bee before he could help himself he was through the open doorway there was a bad smell a man with
dark hair and braids rose from the corner then he saw the iron bars he spun on a heel and saw
man little big man blocking the opening crazy horse shoved the shorter man aside and tried to push
past but almost immediately felt little big man grab both of his arms from behind with a great effort
he pulled himself free and reached into the opening of his blanket for the knife outside there were
shouts of both soldiers and the Lakota let me go he said a little big man let me go the man
the oglala warrior who had written in a battle with him stood fast perhaps it was the blue coat of
the soldier that had turned his heart with a sudden swipe crazy horse slashed the arm of the coat
and immediately blood flowed and little big man jump back with a step crazy horse was outside and
there was movement everywhere more hands grabbed at him from either side brown hands holding
him fast the strident voice of a soldier yelled from the middle of the confusion came a soldier
frusting with the knife at the end of his rifle those near him heard crazy horse gasp and saw
his knees begin to wobble brown hands still holding his arms even as the soldier with
drew the long knife let me go they heard him say quietly you've gotten me hurt then he fell
and crazy horse died a few hours later it details that in the book and
feel and his dream the dream that he had became fulfilled and again it it makes me think about
that that quote that native American quote from that podcast with with Mike afanke that the
diagnosis is a curse and this seems to be something similar when you know that thing when we're driving
go through that driving course and they warn you when you're going through like a tactical driving
course and you're driving around the track or you're driving in an out of traffic you're doing
these things and they warn you they give you a warning they say when you're driving if you look at
something you need what you need to look at is the opening you need to look at the part of the
track that you can drive you need to look at the part of this this road that you can go through that you
can make it through because if you look at another car or you look at a guardrail or you look at a
ditch that's where you're going that's where you're going to end up we go where we aim
and I don't know this is a self fulfilling prophecy here but it might be and I think it's
a good idea to try and set your sights on a positive outcome another thought I had about this is
you know BH Ladell Hart who go listen to some podcasts that I've done on BH Ladell Hart
the indirect approach but he also talked about the fact that
what happens to profits you know profits and you have leaders what happens to profits profits
die when you go out you profit you you make statements and you don't compromise you die
and your your message will get traction later on and and it's using the leaders that take the
message from the profit and turn it into something that can be brought to fruition you know they
they use compromise they use understanding and the usual relationships to to move an idea forward
in a more practical way but the profits the believers that don't compromise oftentimes
they're crucified they're killed and pretty clear where crazy horse fell in that
category which category he fell into powerful lessons to be learned if you want to join us
on the battlefield little big horn we're going to be up there in August
August 16th and 17th and then August 18th and 19th we're doing it back to back
we'll go out there you'll learn we'll learn we'll explore with so many characters
cluster is a leadership lesson after leadership lesson about what not to do
so much so much incredible stuff so we want to join us up there we'll see you go to
echelonfront.com check out events and you can find it we're also going to get his bird
pass a couple podcasts we're about get his bird we're doing that
May 11th and 12th and then again on May 13th and 14th and then there's a dinner before both
those the night before so if you want to come those check them out if and look go anyways you don't have to
go with us go and learn this this as Americans all this is part of our shared history all these lessons
had both these battlefields there's so much for us to learn from and we can learn from you know
in the case of a lot of the things that we heard this soldiers were doing were not
good to look like hey this is what I'm not going to do this is not an honorable way to behave
and then we can see within the Lakota are talking about generosity being the a virtue of a warrior
and then considering that and saying that is a virtue that I want to a strive to as an American
yeah and that this is such a great way to learn these lessons
it is thanks for listening if you want to support yourself or you're supporting us you go to
jockelfield.com get some get some medicine get some medicine
I don't know in the context that we've got right get some medicine get some milk
good medicine for you yes it is um get some stuff for you joints get some stuff for your immunity
get some stuff for your energy levels we've got an energy drink that is not a typical energy
drink it's good for you yep so and it does seem kind of like a rough transitional little
it's a lot of the way to do it like a lot of these these like native American stories or
whatever reason I don't know we were talking earlier where I kind of get a little bit more into
I don't know why maybe because a lot of times it starts with in just right at the beginning
how they start with how they're raised like how the kids are raised and then you know I have
young kids on my man I want my kids to be like crazy worse or what was this name before crazy worse
right here yeah so just from the beginning you're into it you know and then you kind of you
kind of cheering for me and rooting for him then at the end it's all tragic and then now I got to tell
everybody how jockel just when goes so healthy for you it is hard to do but it is hard transition
well we if you want to support that's a good way to do it origin origin us a.com or making a bunch
of stuff in America jockel store.com we got some t-shirts for you some others some other stuff
we got jockel underground.com in case we get shut down for whatever reason you can go there and help us out
we got a YouTube channel so that's cool bunch of books the Ashland front or our leadership consultant
you can check that we got an online training platform which is which is awesome these these
leadership lessons that we're talking about they're not they're skills that you can learn look is
there's some charismatic thing that crazy horse had that maybe we can't give you yes but there's an
unbelievable number of ways that you can improve your leadership and that's what we what we teach in
the academy you know at the academy when we do our live sessions right every single one of them now
someone gives a sit right yeah we're like hey I've been I've been practicing this stuff I'm
checking my ego I've been working with the other teams on our group and and here's all these massive
successes and they just compile every week so you can hear from other leaders that are putting
effort into leadership instead of just not really paying attention to it and then you can quantify
their successes yeah so cool also to you mentioned like leaders say other leaders whatever
think a lot of times we talk about this from time to time we're some people some a lot of people I think
don't hear the word leader and then it's like that's me which kind of they were taught where
you they're straight up talking about that where it's like hey you don't got to be the general you
don't got to be the manager you don't even know everyone's kind of like a leader for different
reasons than the title you know great man and so when you kind of in you know hang around this group
a lot you know I'm not leading though I'm not I'm not I'm not manager you know nothing like that but
some of them team yeah but I'm over here uh uh reaping massive you know rewards from you guys
and it's just me you know from the beginning so I think that's like a the good thing to bring
up and a good distinction where it's like yeah sure you're talking to quote unquote leaders
but it's not just the boss you know it's like everybody's on there no there's and there's individuals
whether there maybe they're running their own business or they're just working somewhere yeah and
they're they're leading themselves and they're part of the mission yeah and you get we get great
feedback from them too you know and here's another thing this translates everywhere so
in the last couple I've been in people have talked about parenting issues
oh for sure the leadership straight up the life time leadership and they're like hey I had
you know I had this issue and I've been having this issue with my son and then I realized
wait a minute it's not my son it's something that I'm doing wrong and I've adjusted the way that I
interact with them and now things are great you know and they're looking at themselves first and
taking ownership and if that what you just said hits you if you're listening this right now you just
heard Jason say that like oh it's something wrong with me as a parent and you all that's bullshit
I'm that's my kid you better do what I tell if that's what you're out of two days I'm telling
you got a rude awakening coming your way the it is leadership it's the same you want to
impose stuff on your children it's not gonna go well for you it's not so be careful that thing you
just there are said about the the example whatever where it's like oh yeah I use like this lesson
looked at myself for whatever you know anytime or I looked at it as no it's not them not doing the
right thing it's me not doing the right thing every single time hundred percent not the 99
maybe I'll come to you know you know hundred percent of the time it worked when I have a discipline
issue with my kids and then I do run the internal debrief or Iris gives me the debriefs
like I'm like how's it going check it's then it gets fixed and I'm like well this is what I
did wrong and this is what I need to do better next time I do those things next time and then
they're in an issue yeah just thanks so that's the that's extreme ownership extreme ownership
dot com if you want to come and join us and a bunch of other people on that we're doing it all the
time if if you want to help out some service members go to america's mighty warriors dot org where
mark least mom set up an incredible organization and and also check out heroes and horses
here's in horses dot com uh micro think we're talking sweat lodge there's some ancient rituals
we're talking about rituals being brought back that's one that that he's doing that to help out a
bunch of veterans that need it so look at that as well if you can help out if you need more of us
we're on social media watch out for the algorithm warning Jason's Jason and Gardner Jason dot
and dot Gardner on instagram and Jason and Gardner on Twitter and echo's adequate
trolls on everything on that jockel willink and thanks to all of our military personnel out there
especially today the Native Americans the Native Americans from our military that have served in
every conflict america has been involved in starting with the revolutionary war and in the civil war
in the civil war in the civil war where general e-l i parker member of the senate could trybe
he was the military secretary to ulysses ask grant he was there when general e-s surrendered
and general e looked at e-l i parker a native american and said i'm glad to see one real american here
to which parker replied we are all americans that's a righteous attitude and the native
americans continued to serve the code to talkers in the world war to ira haze raising the flag on
uo jima he was from the pima people ten thousand native americans fought in Korea
forty two thousand fought in vietnam nineteen percent of native americans have served since nine
eleven and kudan one named michael kenneth bell who is a member of the fort peck tribes in a seal
who i worked with briefly in two thousand five was a complete warrior and who was murdered in
2006 when he was home on leave but a salute to him and all the native american warriors that
serve our country and thanks also to our police and law enforcement fire fighters paramedics
emt's dispatchers correctional officers board a patrol secret service and all first responders
thank you for your service here at home and to everyone else there is another account
there's another account of crazy horses death from a man named Charles a eastman who is a
member of the santi decoda tribe and he was the first native american to be certified in western
medicine he wrote a book called indian heroes and great chiefs and in that book he reported
that crazy horse and that book was written maybe nineteen fifteen nineteen twenty and that book
he reported that crazy horse after he was stabbed with the bayonet he didn't say let me go you've hurt
me what he said was let me go let me die fighting and i don't know which one of those is more
historically accurate but that sounds like a good plan let me die fighting and until next time
this is Jason and echo and jockel out